TPLP: Page 1–8. © The Author(s), 2021. Published by Cambridge University Press 2021
doi:10.1017/xxxxx
1
Long-term Power Grid Planning via Answer Set
Programming
ANTONIO IELO, FRANCESCO DORIA
University of Calabria, Italy
SANDRA CASTELLANOS-PAEZ
University of Huddersfield, UK
MARCO MARATEA
University of Calabria, Italy
FRANCESCO PERCASSI, MAURO V ALLATI
University of Huddersfield, UK
submitted xx xx xxxx; revised xx xx xxxx; accepted xx xx xxxx
Abstract
The Power grid is a critical infrastructure underpinning all aspects of modern society and its services. Main-
taining its effectiveness requires continuous adaptations. In particular, addressing sustainability targets,
demand patterns, and urbanisation trends requires implementing changes to the network. Actual develop-
ments can potentially span over a decade, with supply continuity and service quality that must be preserved
throughout by ensuring conformance to several topological and combinatorial invariants. Long-term power
grid planning deals with the above process, and although planning languages could be a natural choice, the
kind of properties and invariants needed are cumbersome to express in such languages; on the contrary, they
can be elegantly and succinctly encoded in Answer Set Programming (ASP). In this paper, we propose the
first approach to automate and optimise the long-term power grid planning process using ASP. Experimental
evaluations conducted on synthetic and real-world grid data confirm the expressive power of the proposed
ASP-based approach and demonstrate its effectiveness.
KEYWORDS: Answer Set Programming, Application, Energy Management
1 Introduction
Power grids are the backbone of modern societies, and they are currently experiencing significant
structural transformations. The increasing penetration of renewable energy sources (RES) at the
distribution level, combined with the rapid uptake of electric vehicles, heat pumps, and the wider
electrification of end-uses, is changing operational conditions and load patterns. As distribution
networks evolve from passive infrastructures to active systems, their management becomes more
complex and uncertain (Fang et al. 2012). In this context, long-term planning plays a central role.
It refers to the process through which national grid operators define how the current distribution
network should evolve over extended time horizons, to meet future demand, integrate new tech-
nologies, and comply with national and regional energy transition scenarios (Conejo et al. 2010).
More specifically, the long-term planning problem focuses on identifying the feasible multi-stage
arXiv:2605.20172v1  [cs.LO]  19 May 2026

2Cambridge Author
evolution path between the initial and the target desired power grid configuration. The two net-
works may differ significantly in topology, and many sequences of line additions, removals, or
switching actions may connect them. However, considering the time span and the role played by
the power grids, supply continuity and service quality must be preserved throughout the duration
of the evolution (Khator and Leung 1997). Long-term planning decisions are characterized by
their scale and long-lasting impact. For instance, the French distribution network spans approx-
imately 1.4 million kilometres, and the cost of a single power line ranges from 50k C to 200k C
per kilometre, depending on technology and location. Planning horizons typically extend up to
30 years, while infrastructure lifetimes may reach 60 years. As a result, even small inefficien-
cies in planning decisions can lead to significant economic consequences. At present, long-term
power grid planning remains largely manual. National Distribution System Operators rely on
human experts using power-flow and cost-analysis tools, but the construction of multi-stage evo-
lution strategies is still mainly based on expert knowledge and iterative adjustments. This limits
reproducibility, scalability, and the systematic exploration of alternative investment trajectories.
In particular, the identification of feasible evolution strategies remains a major bottleneck, as it
requires exploring a large combinatorial space of possible network transformations while en-
suring that all intermediate configurations remain operational. Recent work has called for au-
tomated, intelligent decision-support tools that can complement human expertise and address
the growing complexity of distribution networks (Castellanos-Paez et al. 2022; 2023). Artificial
Intelligence methods have a long tradition in power systems, ranging from expert systems for
operator support (Wollenberg and Sakaguchi 1987), to planning-based approaches for sequential
operational tasks (Bell et al. 2009; Bertoli et al. 2002; Thi´ebaux et al. 2013), to evolutionary and
learning-based techniques (Arabali et al. 2012; Glavic et al. 2017; V ´azquez-Canteli and Nagy
2019). Mixed Integer Linear Programming has been used for network reconfiguration prob-
lems focused on power and load flow constraints (Jabr et al. 2012; Ajaja and Galiana 2012),
typically in static or short-horizon settings where the goal is to compute a feasible configuration
rather than model transitions between configurations. Moreover, they are less adequate to express
purely combinatorial properties, such as radiality (Ahmadi and Mart ´ı 2015), while being more
suitable for flow-based constraints. Planning languages could be a natural choice, but graph
properties and invariants (e.g., connectedness) are cumbersome to express and are better han-
dled in knowledge representation and reasoning languages. Within this landscape, Answer Set
Programming offers a suitable approach, providing a declarative and expressive framework for
modelling graph-theoretic constraints, discrete actions, and multi-stage feasibility requirements.
Answer Set Programming (ASP; (Brewka et al. 2011)) is a declarative programming language
based on stable model semantics (Gelfond and Lifschitz 1988) of logic programs. Its expressive
power and availability of efficient reasoners makes it a popular framework to model knowledge-
intensive combinatorial problems. ASP has been successfully applied to academic and industrial
problems alike (Erdem et al. 2016; Falkner et al. 2018).
This paper presents the first approach for automating long-term power grid planning that can
handle all grid topological constraints. We propose an approach inspired by recent applications
of ASP toreconfigurationproblems (Yamada et al. 2023; Kato et al. 2024), where one has to find
sequences ofeditsto navigate among solutions of (hard) combinatorial problems. We define an
ASP encoding for the long-term power grid planning problem, that allows for both sequential and
parallel planning. Results of experiments, using theCLINGOASP solver, executed on synthetic
and real-world instances from the French grid, show that our solution is able to efficiently solve

Theory and Practice of Logic Programming3
Fig. 1: Medium-voltage distribution network supplied by two primary substations (black squares)
feeding interconnected feeders (blue lines) and secondary substations; purple circles represent
secondary substations equipped with two normally closed switches (NCS), while green circles
denote secondary substations equipped with one NCS and one normally open switch (NOS) used
for radial operation and reconfiguration. In this work we treat both types of secondary substations
uniformly, and represent operational differences through the status of the network edges (open,
close). (Figure adapted from Castellanos-Paez et al. (2023).)
instances of a size comparable to those that experts deal with in daily operations, when allowing
a parallel execution of actions, and to solve larger real-world instances within 30 minutes.
2 Background
This section introduces the required preliminary notions about distribution networks and the
long-term power grid planning problem, that will be useful to understand our solution.
2.1 Distribution Network Architecture
Urban electrical distribution networks are commonly designed according to a secured feeder ar-
chitecture (see Figure 1). Primary substations act as the supply points of the medium-voltage
distribution network, injecting power into the system through main feeders that interconnect the
substations and supply multiple secondary substations. Along these feeders, secondary substa-
tions serve local areas and include distribution transformers that step down the medium-voltage
level to low voltage for end users, as well as switching devices that control network operation.
Each secondary substation is connected to a feeder through two switches, providing operational
flexibility: normally closed switches (NCS) allow power flow under normal operating conditions,
while normally open switches (NOS) are kept open to ensure radial operation, so that each load
is supplied by a single primary substation. In the event of a fault, the network can be reconfigured
by operating the switches, enabling secondary substations to be resupplied from an alternative
primary substation while repair actions are carried out.
2.2 Power Grid Planning
Distribution System Operators (DSOs) are responsible for ensuring the safe, reliable, and
cost-effective operation of power grids. This mandate includes maintaining existing infrastruc-

4Cambridge Author
tures, guaranteeing continuity and quality of supply, and anticipating future developments in
demand and distributed generation (Khator and Leung 1997; Conejo et al. 2010). In this context,
long-term power grid planning is a core activity.
Long-term planning concerns the definition of how a distribution network should evolve over
extended horizons, typically spanning multiple years. DSOs construct these plans considering
multiple inputs, including consumption forecasts, expected production profiles—including the
integration of renewable energy sources—and broader energy transition scenarios. The goal is to
identify a future network architecture that remains technically feasible, and operationally secure.
Infrastructure modifications in distribution grids are expensive and difficult to reverse. The cost
of a single power line may range from 50 k C to 200 k C per kilometre, depending on technol-
ogy (overhead vs. underground), cable type, and local conditions (rural, semi-urban, or urban).
At the scale of a national distribution system—such as the French network, which extends over
approximately 1.4 million kilometres—even minor changes can result in significant investments.
Consequently, DSOs aim to minimise deviations from the existing infrastructure, favouring in-
cremental and targeted interventions (Conejo et al. 2010).
A distinctive feature of long-term planning is that it must consider not only the final target
network, but also the sequence of intermediate networks that will emerge as investment actions
are gradually executed over many years. Each intermediate configuration must remain compliant
with operational and topological constraints: such intermediate configurations correspond to net-
works that will be in service for extended periods. Ensuring their feasibility is therefore critical
to maintaining security of supply and service quality over time.
According to the ERDF methodology (ERDF 2008) for the development of distribution net-
work master plans in France, the long-term planning process can be represented as a workflow
composed of six main stages : system diagnosis, load forecasting, definition of a long-term target
network, identification of development strategies, techno-economic scheduling of investments,
and assessment of the resulting quality of supply. Among these stages, the identification of de-
velopment strategies is a key step, as it determines how the transition from the current network
to the target configuration is achieved. More informally, given the current network configuration
and the target configuration, this step generates the list of interventions to be performed, and the
corresponding resulting intermediate networks. The present work focuses on this stage, which
remains largely manual and based on expert knowledge in current practice.
To ensure the operationality of intermediate networks during the development strategies step,
and for minimising the potential for wasting resources in the long-term power grid planning
process, a number of implicit rules are usually followed by grid operators. Castellanos-Paez
et al. (2023) extracted the following set of rules via in-depth interviews with experts from French
DSOs that are in charge of the development strategies:
R1 There is no closed loop between two primary substations; that is, a normally open switch is
required to ensure radial operation, meaning that each secondary substation in the network
is supplied by exactly one primary substation.
R2 The network must tolerate the loss of any primary node, ensuring that a radial configura-
tion, in which all secondary nodes remain supplied, can always be restored via switching
operations (opening and closing lines).
R3 For urban areas, the number of connections of secondary substations are between 2 and 3.

Theory and Practice of Logic Programming5
R4 Only lines belonging to the target network can be created, and only lines not belonging to
the target network can be removed. These operations are irreversible, e.g., a line cannot be
removed and later re-added.
R5 There is only one connection between two nodes (distribution/source).
3 Problem Formalisation
For our purposes, the power grid is an undirected graph with two types of nodes (primary, sec-
ondary) and two types of edges (open, close). One acts upon (“reconfigures”) the power grid
by changing its graph structure. Thelong-term planning problem(LPP) refers to computing a
sequence of physical interventions on the power grid infrastructure that results in a specifictar-
getconfiguration, in such a way that each intermediate state complies with the DSOs rules as
described in Section 2.2. In the remainder of this paper, we use the term LPP to refer to the
discrete combinatorial component of the long-term planning process. In this section, we abstract
and formalise the problem and the DSOs requirements into graph-theoretic terms.
Notation.In the rest of the section, we adopt the following notation. LetP,Sbe two finite
disjoint sets ofprimaryandsecondarystations, withV=P∪S. Apower gridis an edge-
labeled undirected graphG(V,E,λ), withE⊆V×Vandλ:E7→ {open,close}. The label-
ing functionλmarks closed and open lines in the power grid. We will refer to the graph
G(V,{e∈E:λ(e) =close})as theclosed networkandG(V,E)as theopen network. The repre-
sentation in Figure 1 is consistent with this notation: secondary substations are not distinguished
at the node level, and their operational differences are encoded through functionλ.
3.1 Acting upon the power grid
There are three possible kinds of actions available to reconfigure the power grid: edge addition,
edge removal and edge switching. Each action changes the power grid graph. Whenever applying
actionaover the power gridGresults inG ′, we denote this byG⊢ a G′. We describe effects of
each possible action onG.
Edge addition.Edge addition consists of adding a new edge to the open network. Letx,y∈V
with(x,y)̸∈E. We denote the action of adding(x,y)toGbyadd(x,y). It results in the power
gridG(V,E ′,λ ′), whereE ′ =E∪ {(x,y)}andλ ′(e) =λ(e)for alle∈E, andλ ′(x,y) =open.
Edge removal.Edge removal consists of removing an edge from the open network. Let(x,y)∈E
such thatλ(x,y) =open. We denote the action of removing(x,y)asremove(x,y). It results in
the power gridG(V,E ′,λ ′), whereE ′ =E\ {(x,y)}andλ ′(e) =λ(e)for alle∈E ′.
Edge switching.Edge switching consists of swapping the state of two edges that are adjacent
to the same secondary station. Letx∈S,y,z∈Vsuch thatλ(x,y) =closeandλ(x,z) =open.
We denote the switching action byswitch(x,y,z). It results in the power gridG(V,E,λ ′), with
λ(e) =λ ′(e)for alle∈E\ {(x,y),(x,z)}andλ ′(x,y) =open,λ ′(x,z) =close.
Non-interfering actions.Executing an action causes a change in the power grid graph. Intu-
itively, concurrent execution of actions that involve the same edges leads to ambiguities during

6Cambridge Author
plans’ execution. We formalise the notion of “allowed concurrency” in our domain, inspired
by the notion ofnon-interferencein planning (see, e.g., (Rintanen et al. 2006)). We denote by
Aff(a)the set of edges that is involved in the execution of actiona, and in particular we have that
Aff(p(x,y)) ={(x,y)}ifp∈ {add,remove}and Aff(switch(x,y,z)) ={(x,y),(x,z)}.
We say two actionsa 1 anda 2 arenon-interfering(orcompatible) if Aff(a 1)and Aff(a 2)are
disjoint sets. Intuitively, non-interfering actions are “compatible”, in the sense that they can be
carried out on the graph “at the same time” without ambiguities. A set of actionsAis non-
interfering if all its elements are pairwise non-interfering. Thus, we extend the notion of affected
edges to sets of actions, with Aff(A) = S
a∈A Aff(a). We say thatG⊢ A G′ if we obtainG ′ by
applying all the actionsa∈A; ifAis non-interfering, there is no ambiguity in the resulting graph
G′ (as no edge is affected by multiple actions).
3.2 Compliant Networks
The DSOs’ rules described in Section 2.2 provide properties that power grids must comply with
to be considered valid. These can be succinctly expressed in terms of graph-theoretic properties.
We say a power gridG(P∪S,E,λ)is compliant whenever the following properties are satisfied.
Definition 1(Radial)
A power gridG(P∪S,E,λ)isradialif its closed network is acyclic and, in this network, each
secondary node is connected to exactly one primary node. That is,Gis a forest with roots inP.
Definition 2(Redundantly Connected)
LetG(P∪S,E,λ)be a power grid. Lets∈Sbe a secondary station connected top∈Pin the
closed network. We say thatsisredundantly connectedif, in the open network, there exists a
path fromsto some primaryp ′ ̸=pwhose internal nodes do not include primary nodes.
Definition 3(Reconfigurable)
LetG(P∪S,E,λ)be a power grid.Gisreconfigurableif all its secondary stationss∈Sare
redundantly connected.
Definition 4(Degree-compliant)
A power gridG(P∪S,E,λ)is degree-compliant if it holds that 2≤deg(s)≤3 for alls∈S.
3.3 Long-term Planning Problem
Finally, given an initial power gridG(P∪S,E,λ)and a target oneG T (P∪S,E T ,λ T ), we define
thelong-term planning problemas computing a sequence of sets of actions(A 0, . . . ,An)such that
Gi ⊢Ai Gi+1, withG 0 =G,G n =G T , and each intermediate networkG i satisfying the radiality,
reconfigurability and degree-compliant properties. We denote byB=E T \Ethe set ofbuildable
edges, i.e., edges present in the target network but absent from the initial one, and byR=E\E T
the set ofremovableedges, i.e., edges present in the initial network but not in the target.
Definition 5(Long-term Planning Problem (LPP))
LetG(P∪S,E,λ)andG T (P∪S,E T ,λ T )be two power grids.LPP(G,G T )is the problem of
computing a sequence of compatible sets of actions(A 0, . . . ,An)such that:
C1G 0 =G,G n =G T ;

Theory and Practice of Logic Programming7
S1
S2
S3
S4
S5
S6
S7
S8
S9
S10P11
P12
(a)
S1
S2
S3
S4
S5
S6
S7
S8
S9
S10P11
P12
(b)
S1
S2
S3
S4
S5
S6
S7
S8
S9
S10P11
P12
(c)
S1
S2
S3
S4
S5
S6
S7
S8
S9
S10P11
P12
(d)
S1
S2
S3
S4
S5
S6
S7
S8
S9
S10P11
P12
(e)
Fig. 2: Example graph configurations illustrating the role of constraints.
C2∀i∈ {0, . . . ,n−1},G i ⊢Ai Gi+1, withG i being radial, reconfigurable, and degree-compliant;
C3 Ifadd(x,y)∈A i then(x,y)∈B;
C4 Ifremove(x,y)∈A i then(x,y)∈R;
C5 No(x,y)such thatadd(x,y)∈A i andremove(x,y)∈A j for some 0≤i,j≤n.
Relationship with DSOs rules.C1 requires that the network evolves fromGtoG T by the end of
the horizon. C2 requires every intermediate networkG i to satisfy radiality (R1), fault-tolerance
under the loss of any primary node (R2), and the degree compliance (R3). R4 is captured by
C3–C5, which constrain admissible line additions and removals and enforce their irreversibility.
In the remainder, we refer to theboundedversion of LPP whenever we assume an integer upper
boundk∈Non the length of the solutions. We refer to thesequentialversion of the problem
whenever we add the requirement that|A i|=1, andparallelotherwise (that is,|A i| ≥1).
Example.Figure 2 illustrates the constraints considered in this work. Figure 2a shows a com-
pliant configuration, where radiality, redundant connectivity, and degree constraints are all satis-
fied. Figure 2b shows the reconfigurability of the graph from Figure 2a under the failure ofP 11;
in particular, radiality can be restored by closing edges(S 2,S 9)and(S 1,S 4). Figure 2c shows a
configuration that violates radiality for two distinct reasons: nodesS6 andS 9 are isolated, and the
feeder associated withP 12 contains a cycle. Figure 2d shows a graph that is radial but not redun-
dantly connected. Figure 2e shows how the violation of connectivity in the graph provided in 2d
implies non-reconfigurability: in particular, in case of failure ofP 11, nodeS 1 can be resupplied
by closing(S 1,S 4), whereasS 2,S 5, andS 10 remain isolated.
4 ASP Encoding
In this section, we present our Answer Set Programming (ASP) solution designed to model the
LPP problem. We assume the reader to be familiar with ASP and the input language of the
CLINGOsystem, and refer them to standard introductory material (Lifschitz 2019; Gebser et al.
2012). We start with a high-level description of our approach.
The idea of the encoding is to model how thestarting network Gevolves subject to a sequence
of sets of actions(A 0, . . . ,Ak), with the goal of transforming it into a desiredtarget network
GT within a given number of stepsk. The approach is inspired by classical ASP applications in
planning (Son et al. 2023) and bounded reconfiguration (Yamada et al. 2023; Kato et al. 2024)
problems. We first present the data model, and then the proposed ASP encoding.

8Cambridge Author
4.1 Data Model
LetG(P∪S,E,λ)andG T (P∪S,E T ,λ T )be a pair of power grids. We describe the predicates
and facts we use to represent inputs and outputs of theLPP(G,G T )problem.
Input.To describe the available stations in the power grid, we use atoms of the formnode(x)
forx∈P∪S. The atomnode attr(x,primary)models that nodexis a primary node,x∈P.
Edges that belong to the start configuration are described by the predicatestart/3. In particu-
lar, ifλ(x,y) =o, we have the atomstart(x,y,o), witho∈ {open,close}. Similarly, edges in
the target configuration are described by the predicatetarget/3, with the atomtarget(x,y,o)
wheneverλ T (x,y) =o. We state that an edge(x,y)may be built or removed by using the atoms
buildable(x,y)andmust remove(x,y). As input, we expect anundirectedrepresentation of the
graph, and in particular we assume the factstart(x,y,o)withx<y.
Output.A solution(A 0, . . . ,Ak)to theLPP(G,G T )problem is described by means of the
action/2 predicate, where the atomaction(t,a)models thata∈A t. In particular,awill be func-
tion terms of the formadd/2,remove/2 andswitch/3, mirroring how possible actions are defined
in Section 3.1. As an example,action(3,switch(x,y,z))means that the solution includes the ac-
tionswitch(x,y,z)at time 3, that isswitch(x,y,z)∈A 3.
4.2 Encoding of the problem
We present the ASP encoding used to model the LPP problem. We describe it incrementally, with
each paragraph assuming all the rules that precede it. We refer to thei-th line in the encoding by
ri. We present the encoding to compute a bounded solution of length at mostk.
Initial definitions.We start with definitions that make the encoding more readable. LetG(P∪
S,E,λ)be a power grid. We denote which nodes of our network are respectively primary stations
or secondary stations by theprimary/1 andsecondary/1 predicates, respectively. We will have
the atomprimary(x)ifx∈P, andsecondary(x)ifx∈S. Theopposite/2 predicate expresses the
notion that open line and closed lines are opposite concepts. Thenetwork/4 predicate stores the
“state”, withnetwork(i,x,y,o)stating thatλ i(x,y) =oin thei-th power grid. We assumet=−1
corresponds to the initial state of the network 1. Theedge/4 predicate is a “symmetric closure”
ofnetwork/4 over time (that also keeps track of each edge’s state), that will be useful to define
the effects of theswitchaction (r 13–r14).
1primary(X) :- node_attr(X, is_primary).
2secondary(X) :- node(X), not primary(X).
3opposite(open,close). opposite(close,open).
4network(-1,X,Y,A) :- start(X,Y,A).
5edge(T, X, Y, A) :- network(T, X, Y, A).
6edge(T, X, Y, A) :- network(T, Y, X, A).
1 The encoding assumes actions at timetget applied at timet, and depend on timet−1. This is a minor implementation
detail, just an index shift wrt the definition of a solution(A 0, . . . ,Ak)of the LPP problem.

Theory and Practice of Logic Programming9
Generating action sequences.The following rules generate the search space of possible action
sequences. Informally, we first guess “the plan’s length”(r 8)by guessing atime/1 atom (and
propagating backwards existence of previous time-points, up to zero(r 9):
7#const k. step(0..k-1). time(0).
8{ time(T) } :- step(T).
9time(T-1) :- time(T), T > 0.
Next, the following choice rules impose that edges to be built and removed will be subject to
anadd(r 12) andremoveaction (r 10), respectively, exactly once within the whole solution. We
prohibit the removal of closed edges (r11). The third choice rule (r13–r14) guesses edge switching
operations. The last constraintr 15 imposes that we perform at least one action in each time-point.
10{ action(T,remove(X,Y)): time(T) } = 1 :- must_remove(X,Y).
11:- action(T, remove(X,Y)), network(T-1,X,Y,close).
12{ action(T,add(X,Y)): time(T) } = 1 :- buildable(X,Y).
13{ action(T,switch(X,Y,Z)): edge(T-1, X, Y, O), edge(T-1, X, Z, O’),
14opposite(O,O’), secondary(X) } :- time(T).
15:- time(T), not action(T,_).
The atomaction(t,a)encodes that at timetthe actionais performed, where the actionais
a function term as described in Section 4.1. We assume that actions taken at timetact upon the
network as available in the previous time-stept−1, and take effect at timet.
Thea f f ected by/4 predicate (r16–r21) marks networks’ edges that are affected by an action,
according to the definition of Aff(·). In particular, the atoma f f ected by(t,x,y,a)states that
(x,y)∈Aff(a), and thatais performed at timet. Affected edges will either change their state
(i.e., whether they are open or close), or be added/removed at the next time-point.
16affected_by(T,X,Y,add(X,Y)) :- action(T,add(X,Y)).
17affected_by(T,X,Y,remove(X,Y)) :- action(T,remove(X,Y)).
18affected_by(T,X,Y,switch(X,Y,Z)) :- action(T,switch(X,Y,Z)).
19affected_by(T,Y,X,switch(X,Y,Z)) :- action(T,switch(X,Y,Z)).
20affected_by(T,X,Z,switch(X,Y,Z)) :- action(T,switch(X,Y,Z)).
21affected_by(T,Z,X,switch(X,Y,Z)) :- action(T,switch(X,Y,Z)).
Notice that (seer 10–r12) we can add an edge(x,y)only if it we have thebuildable(x,y)fact,
and similarly we can remove it only if we have themust remove(x,y)fact. Thus, for add and
remove actions, we know precisely the affected edge in the ASP representation. On the other
hand, the available switch actions are defined on the previous network state (r 13), and an edge
may be affected by switch actions from different endpoints. As an example, edge(S 6,S 9)in
Figure 2 may be affected byswitch(S 6,S 8,S 9)but alsoswitch(S 9,S 6,S 2). Thus, the definition of
a f f ected by/4 takes this into account (r 18–r21). To ensure our solutions consist of compatible
action sets, we forbid to guess non-compatible actions (i.e., actions affecting the same edge).
22:- affected_by(T,X,Y,A), affected_by(T,X,Y,A’), A < A’.
Actions’ Effect.The following rules applythe effectof actions taken at timeton the net-
work at timet−1, according to the formalisation of Section 3.1. They share the use of atoms
network(t−1, , , )andaction(t, )—past network state and action to execute—in the body, and
havenetwork(t, , , )—how the network is affected by the action.
Actions of the formadd(x,y)simply define that the edge(x,y)will exist at the next time-step:

10Cambridge Author
23network(T,X,Y,open) :- time(T), action(T,add(X,Y)).
The edge switchingswitch(x,y,z)operation first identifies the correct pair of edges that is
involved in the action, then flips their state in the next time-step:
24network(T,X,Y,O’) :- affected_by(T,X,Y,switch(_,_,_)), network(T-1,X,Y,O),
25opposite(O,O’).
All edges that are not affected by an action are implicitly carried over to the next time-step,
with the same state as before. This is a form ofinertia. The combination ofremove(x,y)affecting
(x,y)and intertia implicitly removes edges.
26network(T,X,Y,A) :- time(T), network(T-1,X,Y,A), not affected_by(T,X,Y,_).
Encoding Radiality I (Connectedness).To enforce the radiality property, as by Definition 1, we
require the closed network to be a forest with roots in the primary nodesP. First, we ensure that
(i)all secondarys∈Sreach at least one primaryp∈Pin the closed network, and(ii)there are
no loops between primaries over the closed network. We start by defining the standard notion of
graph reachability over the closed network by means of the predicatereach/3 (r 27–r30):
27reach(T,X,Y) :- time(T), network(T,X, Y,close).
28reach(T,X,Y) :- time(T), network(T,Y, X,close).
29reach(T,X,Y) :- time(T), reach(T,Y,X).
30reach(T,X,Z) :- time(T), reach(T,X,Y), reach(T,Y,Z).
Then, we use the atomreaches primary(t,x,y)to model that nodexis connected to the primary
stationyat timet. The constraints model, respectively, that two distinct primaries should not
reach each other (r32), and that all secondary stations should be connected to at least one primary
station (r33).
31reaches_primary(T,X,Y) :- time(T), reach(T,X,Y), primary(Y).
32:- primary(X), primary(Y), time(T), X < Y, reach(T,X,Y).
33:- secondary(Y), time(T), not reaches_primary(T,Y,_).
Encoding Radiality II (Acyclicity).Since the problem deals with undirected graphs and the
previous rules (r32–r33) enforce that each secondary station is connected to exactly one primary
station in the closed network (recall that if it were connected to two there would be a loop
between primaries, which we forbid by means of a constraint (r 32), it is sufficient to enforce
that the network at timethasthe correct number of edgesto enforce acyclicity. Since we are
looking for|P|disjoint trees and the number of edges in a tree ofqnodes isq−1, we want our
network to have exactly|V|−|P|edges. The predicatesnum primaries/1 andnum nodes/1 store
the number of primary nodes and overall number of nodes in the network, while the constraint
(r36–r37) enforces the correct number of overall edges.
34num_primaries(R) :- R=#count{Z: primary(Z)}.
35num_nodes(X) :- X=#count{Z: node(Z)}.
36:- num_primaries(R), num_nodes(Q), time(T),
37#count{X, Y: network(T,X,Y,close)} != (Q-R).
Encoding Reconfigurability.Secondary stations must beredundantly connected(Definition 2)
to an extra primary substation over the open network, distinct from the one they are connected to

Theory and Practice of Logic Programming11
in the closed network. Recall that a secondary station cannot be connected to two primary stations
in the closed network, as this would create a loop between primaries and violate radiality.
38redundancy_reach(T,X,Y) :- time(T), network(T,X,Y,_).
39redundancy_reach(T,X,Y) :- time(T), redundancy_reach(T,Y,X).
40redundancy_reach(T,X,Z) :- time(T), redundancy_reach(T,X,Y),
41redundancy_reach(T,Y,Z), not primary(Y).
42redundancy(T,S) :- secondary(S), time(T), redundancy_reach(T, S, X),
43primary(X), not reach(T, S, X).
44:- secondary(S), time(T), not redundancy(T,S).
The predicateredundancy reach/3 models reachability over the open network (r 38–r41),
with the atomredundancy reach(t,x,y)modelling that nodexis connected to nodeyover
the open networkwith a path that does not traverse any primary substation– notice thenot
primary(Y)atom in the body of the recursive definition ofredudancy reach/3 (r41). This en-
sures the only way networks’ edges involving primaries are taken into account in computing
redundancy reach/3 is via direct edges. Finally,redundancy(t,s)denotes that at timetthe sec-
ondary stationsreaches a primary substation over the open network, and we prevent a secondary
station that does not (r 44), ensuring reconfigurability as by Definition 3, i.e. that all secondary
nodes are redundantly connected.
Encoding degree-compliance.We use aggregates to count the number of adjacent edges to each
node, with the atomdegree(t,x,d)meaning that nodexhas degreedin the network at timet.
The constraints(r 46–r47)enforce thatd∈[2,3], as by Definition 4:
45degree(T,X,D) :- time(T), node(X), D=#count{Y: edge(T,X,Y,_)}.
46:- secondary(S), time(T), degree(T,S,D), D < 2.
47:- secondary(S), time(T), degree(T,S,D), D > 3.
Final configuration.We encode that the final network obtained by applying the guessed actions
sequence is exactly the target networkG T , as in Definition 5: it contains the same edges asG T
and in the same state (r49–r50), and all edges to be removed have been removed (r51).
48final(T) :- time(T), T = #max{ T’ : time(T’) }.
49:- final(T), target(X,Y,A), not network(T,X,Y,A).
50:- final(T), network(T,X,Y,A), not target(X,Y,A).
51:- final(T), must_remove(X,Y), network(T,X,Y,_).
Preferred solutions.Answer sets of the above logic program encode sequences of (sets of) ac-
tions that reconfigureGintoG T . As customary in ASP applications, multiple answer sets may
exist, i.e., multiple ways to reconfigureGintoG T . ASP optimization (via weak constraints) en-
ables us to single outpreferred solutions, according to different criteria. For the purposes of this
paper, we are interested in reducing the overall number of actions executed in the plan, as well
as its length (lexicographically). We can express this by the constraints:
52:∼action(T,switch(X,Y,Z)). [1@2,T,A]
53:∼time(T). [1@1,T]

12Cambridge Author
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160
# Solved Instances
10−2
10−1
100
101
102
103
Runtime [log-s]
ExpSearch (S)
Bounded @ g (S)
Bounded @ 2 g (S)
ExpSearch (P)
Bounded @ 1
2 (P)
Bounded @ g (P)
Bounded @ 2 g (P)
10−1 101 103
Bounded Search [log-s]
10−2
10−1
100
Exponential Search [log-s]
1
2g
g
2g
Fig. 3: (a) A point(i,t)indicates thatiinstances are solved intseconds. (b) A point(x,y)denotes
a synthetic instance solved inyseconds by exponential and inxby bounded. Points below the
bisector indicate faster exponential search.
The weak constraintr 52 minimizes the total number of actions 2, while the weak constraintr 53
favours shorter plans.
5 Experimental Analysis
The empirical evaluation aims to assess the capabilities of the proposed approach. We start by
describing the experimental settings and, then, in Section 5.1, we present the results.
Execution environment.Experiments were executed on a 64-bit Linux machine equipped with
an Intel i7-13700 @ 5.2 GHz with 32GB of RAM and 16 physical cores, running up to 8 concur-
rent jobs via GNU Parallel. Each run was limited to a timeout of 1800 CPU seconds and 2 GB
of memory. We use theCLINGOsolver (version 5.4.1) in default configuration.
Implementation details.In real scenarios, a bound on reconfiguration’s length is unknown. We
progressively expand such bound by means of multiple solver calls. In particular, we solve the
bounded version of the problem over the interval[2 h,2 h+1](i.e., we search for a plan of length
at least 2h and at most 2h+1) starting withh=0, and increasing it up to the point where we find
a solution (or hit resource limits). To enforce a lower bound 2h on plan’s length, we add the fact
time(2h), while to enforce an upper bound 2h+1 we set the runtime constantkto 2 h+1.
Data.Our test set is composed by a collection of synthetic and real-world instances. The 7
real instances were obtained using data from a French urban network consisting of two source
stations (primary nodes). This data has been anonymised and used to create smaller subnetworks
that comply with a secure feeder architecture, and correspond to French distribution network
design practices in terms of topology, feeder capacity constraints, and balancing criteria. The
instances range in size from 6 to 40 secondary nodes, and all have 2 primary nodes. Further, we
generated synthetic instances by varying the number of nodes|V| ∈ {8,12,15,18,22,30,40,50},
2 Edges cannot be added (removed) twice, hence minimizing actions is equivalent to minimizing the number of switches.

Theory and Practice of Logic Programming13
|V|Exp. Search 1
2 g g2g Total
8 25;25 0;25 25;25 25;25 75;100
12 21;25 0;25 25;25 25;25 71;100
18 11;25 0;25 19;21 16;16 46;87
22 7;25 0;16 13;11 9;11 29;63
30 5;25 0;15 5;10 5;5 15;55
40 5;25 0;10 5;5 0;0 10;40
50 0;25 0;5 0;0 0;0 0;30
Total 74;175 0;121 92;97 80;82 246;475
Table 1: Number of solved instances by graph
size and method. Cell contentx;ydenotes that
we solvexinstances with sequential planning,
andyinstances with parallel planning, respec-
tively.
8 12 18 22 30 40 50
|V |
10−2
10−1
100
101
102
103
Runtime [log-s]
Exp. Search
1
2g
g
2g
Fig. 4: Parallel plans runtime comparison
across graph sizes. Red bar is the median run-
time.
fixing the number of primary nodes to|P|=2. This size matches what experts deal with in daily
operations. For each size, we sampled five random compliant power grids. Starting from each grid
G, we constructed a sequential plan by applying valid random actions that preserve compliance,
leading toG T . In doing so, we avoid trivial redundancies, i.e., addition-removals of the same
edge, or “opposite switches” in adjacent time-steps. Motivated by the empirical observation that,
in real instances, solution length is approximately equal to the number of edges, we considered
plan depths of the formα· |E|withα∈ {0.2,0.6,1.0,1.4,1.8}. Executing these action sequences
yields pairs of compliant configurations(G,G T ), which constitute valid instances of the LPP.
Overall, this process generates 175 synthetic LPP instances. Moreover,α· |E|is an upper bound
for a sequential solution’s length. We will refer to this (instance-wise) upper bound asg, and
experiments will consider 1
2g,gand 2gas possible bounds.
5.1 Results
Below we present the results of our experiments. All solutions have been validated using an
external purposely-designed tool to assess the satisfaction of the DSO rules.
Synthetic instances.In order to select the best approaches, to be employed on real data, we
first test our encoding in the bounded and exponential search version, searching for sequential
and parallel plans, on the synthetic instances. We report our results in terms of the cactus plot
and scatterplot in Figure 3. First, we can observe in Figure 3a that we are able to solve more
problem instances dealing with parallel plans wrt sequential plans. Intuitively, this is due to
non-interfering actions “compressing” the solutions’ length, which translates to dealing with
smaller logic programs. In ASP planning, this typically correlates witheasierproblems, given
that long plans are a known pain point also for ASP-based planning (see, e.g., (Son et al. 2023)).
Exponential search performs worse than bounded search over sequential plans, as it incurs in
overhead due to multiple solver calls that are required to expand the search horizon, while the
bounded encoding operates directly on it. In the parallel setting, the exponential search approach
dominates, solving 54 more instances wrt the bounded at horizon1
2g, 78 wrtgand 93 wrt 2g, with
all instances being mostly trivial for the parallel approach. The scatterplot in Figure 3b shows that
for parallel plans, all instances slow down as bounds increase. In particular, we can observe (top-

14Cambridge Author
Parallel Parallel Optimization
Instance # NodesrΣ|A i|max|A i|rΣ|A i|max|A i|Opt?
P06 8 0.0 12 5 0.0 7 4✓
P10 12 0.0 20 6 0.1 20 6✓
P13 12 0.0 19 5 0.1 16 7✓
P16 18 1.0 30 7 0.9 30 7
P22 24 0.4 40 12 1.8 29 10✓
P30 30 41.2 67 10 62.2 65 11
P40 42 – – – 1485.7 103 14
Table 2: Runtime (r) on real instances of a given size (# Nodes), with total number of actions
(Σ|Ai|) and maximum number of concurrent actions (max|A i|). Dashes (–) denote timeout. The
“Opt?” column marks instances where we are able to prove optimality of the parallel plan.
right corner of the scatter-plot) that these synthetic instances—despite being trivial whenever
they admit a short solution—are challenging if we try to solve at a much higher bound: we
observe several instances that can be solved within seconds by the exponential search approach,
but time-out with larger bounds. Table 1 shows that all techniques solvefewerinstances as|V|
increases. Parallel exponential search scales better as|V|increases. This is confirmed by runtimes
distributions in Figure 4. The largest instances are comparable in size to those handled by human
experts, both for training and for the actual long-term planning of power grids. Larger grids are
generally decomposed into networks of between 20-25 nodes. In that sense, our approach can
readily support the work of experts. Overall, these results on synthetic instances motivate our
focusing on parallel plans and exponential search approaches to solve real-world scenarios.
Real instances.Table 2 reports runtime of our exponential search approach, with and without
optimization statements (as discussed in Section 4). We are able to solve instances of up to 42
nodes, proving the approach is useful for operation-support in realistic scenarios, and can solve
instances of size larger than those experts deal in daily operations. Runtimes are comparable with
the ones we obtained over synthetic instances of the same size. On some solved instances, we are
also able to prove optimality of parallel plans. In real-world scenarios, this translate in lower costs
and simpler-to-put-in-place operations. These solutions were validated by an automated tool and
visually reviewed by domain experts, who confirmed their consistency with DSO planning rules
and their comparability, at the topological level, to solutions typically produced by experts.
6 Conclusion
The problem of long-term power grid planning requires computing sequences of operations on
the power grid infrastructure totransformit into a target configuration, while guaranteeing that
each intermediate state satisfies certain properties of interest. Enacting these plans may span
many years of costly operations. Currently, such plans are devised manually by domain experts.
This paper proposes an ASP-based approach to tackle the problem, providing an automated so-
lution inspired by ASP planning and ASP reconfiguration. Our experiments on synthetic and
real-world data show that the approach can solve complex instances comparable to, or larger
than, those currently handled by human operators. As future work, we plan to further improve
scalability by applying, e.g., domain-specific heuristics and decomposition methods, and adapt to
infrastructure-specific requirements that may be present in other installations, such as immutabil-
ity of certain components or budget limitations.

Theory and Practice of Logic Programming15
Acknowledgements
This work has been partially supported by the Italian “Ministero delle Imprese e Sviluppo Eco-
nomico” (MIMIT) under projects “Ei-TWIN - Energy Digital Twin” (CUP B29J2400068000);
by Regione Calabria under PR Calabria FESR FSE 2021–2027 through the projects “MOZART
- Modelli e tecniche di mOdernizzazione di applicaZioni e data silos a supporto di clienti esterni,
field force e impiegati di backoffice basati su AI GeneRativa e apprendimento auTomatico” (CUP
J49I24001740005), and “SIGENERA - Large Language Models (LLM) per il controllo di SIs-
temi informativi, la GENERazione automatica di testo, e l’accesso a basi di conoscenzA ” (CUP
J29I24001770005). Francesco Percassi and Mauro Vallati were supported by a UKRI Future
Leaders Fellowship, grant number MR/Z00005X/1.
References
AHMADI, H.ANDMART ´I, J. R. 2015. Mathematical representation of radiality constraint in distribution
system reconfiguration problem.International Journal of Electrical Power & Energy Systems,64, 293–
299.
AJAJA, A.ANDGALIANA, F. D. Distribution network reconfiguration for loss reduction using MILP. In
IEEE PES Innovative Smart Grid Technologies Conference, ISGT 2012, Washington, DC, USA, January
16-20, 20122012, pp. 1–6. IEEE.
ARABALI, A., GHOFRANI, M., ETEZADI-AMOLI, M., FADALI, M. S.,ANDBAGHZOUZ, Y. 2012.
Genetic-algorithm-based optimization approach for energy management.IEEE Transactions on Power
Delivery,28, 1, 162–170.
BELL, K., COLES, A., COLES, A., FOX, M.,ANDLONG, D. 2009. The role of ai planning as a decision
support tool in power substation management.Ai Communications,22, 1, 37–57.
BERTOLI, P., CIMATTI, A., SLANEY, J. K.,ANDTHI ´EBAUX, S. Solving power supply restoration prob-
lems with planning via symbolic model checking. InProceedings of ECAI2002, pp. 576–580.
BREWKA, G., EITER, T.,ANDTRUSZCZYNSKI, M. 2011. Answer set programming at a glance.Commun.
ACM,54, 12, 92–103.
CASTELLANOS-PAEZ, S., ALVAREZ-HERAULT, M.-C.,ANDLALANDA, P. Automated planning to evolve
smart grids with renewable energies. InArtificial Intelligence for Knowledge Management, Energy, and
Sustainability2022, pp. 141–155. Springer.
CASTELLANOS-PAEZ, S., ALVAREZ-HERAULT, M. C.,ANDLALANDA, P. Decision support tool for the
development of power distribution networks based on AI planning. InCIRED2023, pp. 1425–1429.
CONEJO, A. J., CARRION, M.,ANDMORALES, J. M. 2010.Decision Making Under Uncertainty in
Electricity Markets. Springer.
ERDEM, E., GELFOND, M.,ANDLEONE, N. 2016. Applications of answer set programming.AI Mag.,37,
3, 53–68.
ERDF 2008. Description physique du r ´eseau public. Accessed: 2026-01-30.
FALKNER, A. A., FRIEDRICH, G., SCHEKOTIHIN, K., TAUPE, R.,ANDTEPPAN, E. C. 2018. Industrial
applications of answer set programming.K ¨unstliche Intell.,32, 2-3, 165–176.
FANG, X., MISRA, S., XUE, G.,ANDYANG, D. 2012. Smart grid — the new and improved power grid:
A survey.IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials,14, 4, 944–980.
GEBSER, M., KAMINSKI, R., KAUFMANN, B.,ANDSCHAUB, T. 2012.Answer Set Solving in Practice.
Synthesis Lectures on Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning. Morgan & Claypool Publishers.
GELFOND, M.ANDLIFSCHITZ, V. The stable model semantics for logic programming. InLogic Program-
ming, Proceedings of the Fifth International Conference and Symposium1988, pp. 1070–1080.
GLAVIC, M., FONTENEAU, R.,ANDERNST, D. 2017. Reinforcement learning for electric power system
decision and control: Past considerations and perspectives.IFAC-PapersOnLine,50, 1, 6918–6927.

16Cambridge Author
JABR, R. A., SINGH, R.,ANDPAL, B. C. 2012. Minimum loss network reconfiguration using mixed-
integer convex programming.IEEE Transactions on Power systems,27, 2, 1106–1115.
KATO, M., BANBARA, M., SCHAUB, T., SOH, T.,ANDTAMURA, N. 2024. Dominating set reconfigura-
tion with answer set programming.Theory Pract. Log. Program.,24, 4, 755–771.
KHATOR, S. K.ANDLEUNG, L. C. 1997. Power distribution planning: A review of models and issues.
IEEE Transactions on Power Systems,12, 3, 1151–1159.
LIFSCHITZ, V. 2019.Answer Set Programming. Springer.
RINTANEN, J., HELJANKO, K.,ANDNIEMEL ¨A, I. 2006. Planning as satisfiability: parallel plans and al-
gorithms for plan search.Artif. Intell.,170, 12-13, 1031–1080.
SON, T. C., PONTELLI, E., BALDUCCINI, M.,ANDSCHAUB, T. 2023. Answer set planning: A survey.
Theory Pract. Log. Program.,23, 1, 226–298.
THI ´EBAUX, S., COFFRIN, C., HIJAZI, H.,ANDSLANEY, J. Planning with MIP for supply restoration in
power distribution systems. InProceedings of IJCAI2013, pp. 2900–2907.
V ´AZQUEZ-CANTELI, J. R.ANDNAGY, Z. 2019. Reinforcement learning for demand response: a review
of algorithms and modeling techniques.Applied Energy,235, 1072–1089.
WOLLENBERG, B. F.ANDSAKAGUCHI, T. 1987. Artificial intelligence in power system operations.Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE,75, 12, 1678–1685.
YAMADA, Y., BANBARA, M., INOUE, K.,ANDSCHAUB, T. Recongo: Bounded combinatorial reconfigu-
ration with answer set programming. InJELIA2023, pp. 278–286.
