Streamlined Constraint Reasoning via CNN Pattern Recognition on
Enumerated Solutions
Patrick Spracklen
May 20, 2026
Abstract
Constraint programming practitioners accelerate hard problems through a layered set of
techniques applied in order of risk. Standard hardening (symmetry-breaking constraints and
implied constraints) preserves satisfiability and is applied first.Streamliner constraints, which
restrict search to a structural sub-family of solutions, do not preserve satisfiability and are reserved
as a final lever for instances where hardening alone is insufficient. Existing automated streamliner-
synthesis approaches either search a structured constraint grammar with combinatorial budgets
or prompt a Large Language Model directly on the problem model. We propose a different
approach: enumerate feasible solutions to a training instance, train a Convolutional Neural
Network contrastively against perturbed non-solutions to detect structural patterns the feasibility
predicate exploits, and translate the CNN’s discriminative signal, via both filter-property
correlations and direct filter-contrast between high-activation and low-activation solutions, into
candidate MiniZinc streamliners through LLM-driven constraint synthesis. The CNN serves as a
pattern recognizer over enumerated solutions, surfacing structural regularities that ground the
LLM’s constraint-generation reasoning. We evaluate on hardened variants of standard benchmark
models (symmetry-breaking and implied constraints already in place), where streamliner discovery
is the residual performance lever. Our pipeline achieves 98 .8% portfolio time reduction on
hardened Vessel Loading, 98.6% on hardened Social Golfers, and 89 .4% on Black Hole, with best-
single streamliners reaching geometric-mean speedups of 932 ×, 356×, and 1103 × respectively.
Discovered streamliners include class-based packing constraints on Vessel Loading, beyond-
hardening canonicalisations on Social Golfers, and layout-coordinate bounds on Black Hole:
structural restrictions that the standard hardening does not provide.
1 Introduction
Constraint programming (CP) [ 18] solves decision and optimisation problems by propagating
declarative constraints over finite-domain variables. Practitioners accelerate hard problem instances
through a layered set of techniques applied in order of risk to the underlying problem specification.
Symmetry-breaking constraints[ 7], which fix a canonical representative in each orbit of the problem’s
symmetry group, andimplied constraints[ 5], which state consequences of the formulation that
aid propagation, both preserve satisfiability of the original instance: implied constraints leave the
solution set unchanged, while symmetry-breaking constraints retain at least one representative from
every orbit so a model is satisfiable iff the original is. These sound techniques are applied first, and
form the standard hardening of any well-engineered CP model.
Streamliner constraints[ 13] sit outside this set. A streamliner restricts search to solutions
sharing a particular structural property, pruning large portions of the search tree at the cost of
completeness: a streamlined instance may be rendered unsatisfiable even when the original has
solutions, and proving unsatisfiability on a tightly-constrained streamlined instance can itself be
1
arXiv:2605.19895v1  [cs.AI]  19 May 2026

expensive. Because the satisfiability tradeoff is real, a streamliner is properly viewed as a tool of
last resort: the CP practitioner should harden the model with sound techniques first, and only
invoke a streamliner when those options have been exhausted on instances that remain intractable.
This ordering matters for evaluating automated streamliner-synthesis methods: a method evaluated
on an unhardened model may be measuring the recovery of constraints a practitioner would have
added by hand before contemplating a streamliner.
Prior automated approaches.Two families of automated streamliner-synthesis methods have
been published. The first conducts directed search over a structured constraint grammar [ 27, 22, 23,
24]: candidate streamliners are drawn from a constraint lattice with Monte-Carlo or portfolio-based
selection. The approach is sound and reproducible but the candidate space is bounded by the
grammar the authors anticipated; constraint shapes outside the grammar cannot be discovered.
The most recent approach, StreamLLM [ 25], prompts a Large Language Model with the MiniZinc
model and asks it to emit candidate streamliners with closed-loop runtime feedback. This removes
the grammar bound and reports large speedups across a benchmark suite. The cost is that the LLM
is working from parametric knowledge alone: it knows what constraints look like for this problem
class, but has no grounding in what structural patterns actually hold in the feasible solutions of the
specific instance at hand.
The hardening question.Both prior approaches are evaluated against benchmark models
in their as-shipped form, which for several CP problems omits literature-standard hardening.
Our own measurements (Section 3) make the consequences concrete: adding literature-standard
symmetry-breaking and implied constraints to the StreamLLM-distributed Hypergraph Coloring
and Vessel Loading models reduces the median Chuffed baseline solve time from ≥1800 s to under
20 s, with Hypergraph Coloring collapsing to 0 .2 s. Streamliner-discovery results obtained against
these unhardened baselines therefore conflate two different signals: the recovery of missing model
constraints, and the discovery of genuine streamliners. The harder and more practical question is
what remainsafterthe standard hardening is applied, and whether useful streamliners can still be
found in that regime.
Our approach: pattern recognition on enumerated solutions.Rather than searching a
constraint space, we extract structure directly from observed solutions and translate that structure
into candidate streamliners. For each training instance we enumerate at least 500 feasible solutions
with a complete solver and train a 3-layer Convolutional Neural Network contrastively against
perturbed non-solutions. The CNN’s filters learn to detect structural patterns the feasibility
predicate exploits. We surface the CNN’s signal in two complementary ways: (i) by correlating
each filter’s activations with a problem-shape-specific library of ≈ 30 structural properties (row and
column aggregates, adjacent-pair statistics, positional centroids, and so on), producing a relevance
ranking we present to the LLM alongside per-property summary statistics; and (ii) by directly
comparing high-activation against low-activation solutions under top-variance filters, asking the
LLM to hypothesise the structural shape each filter is detecting. Both paths emit candidate MiniZinc
streamliners that are pooled, semantically clustered, and validated against cached baselines.
The structuring choice is that the CNN serves as apattern recognizer over enumerated solutions:
it extracts structure from the data without needing a hand-written constraint grammar, and that
structure grounds the LLM’s constraint synthesis in observable evidence rather than text-level
inference from the problem model.
2

Evaluation regime and headline results.We evaluate on hardened benchmark models, where
the standard sound techniques have been applied and only genuine streamliner discovery remains
as a performance lever. All headline portfolio numbers below use the family-budget allocation
(Section 4.5) at k = 3 families with m = 3 members per family; we additionally report simple
top-3 numbers as a comparison baseline. Our pipeline delivers 98 .8% portfolio time reduction
on hardened Vessel Loading, 98 .6% on hardened Social Golfers, and 89 .4% on Black Hole (the
one benchmark in our suite without canonical hardening, making the head-to-head comparison
with prior work methodologically clean), matching StreamLLM’s realtime result on Black Hole
with simple-top-3 and exceeding it with the family-budget allocation; the discovered constraints
are qualitatively distinct from those found by model-text-only synthesis (Section 5.3). Best-single
streamliners reach geometric-mean speedups in the hundreds-to- thousands range on the instances
they retain; per-problem numbers and retention denominators are reported in Section 5. The
discovered constraints are structurally distinct from what the hardening provides: class-based
packing constraints on Vessel Loading, beyond-hardening canonicalisations on Social Golfers, and
layout-coordinate bounds on Black Hole. This gives direct evidence that the pipeline finds residual
structure that the standard sound techniques do not capture.
Contributions.
1. A streamliner-synthesis pipeline driven by CNN pattern recognition on enumerated solutions,
with two LLM-prompting paths (filter-property correlation and direct filter-contrast on solution
pairs) that together turn observed solution structure into candidate MiniZinc constraints
(Section 4).
2. Empirical demonstration that this pipeline finds useful streamliners both on hardened bench-
marks (Sections 5.4 and 5.5) and on Black Hole, the one benchmark in our suite without
canonical hardening (Section 5.3). On Black Hole, where direct comparison with Stream-
LLM [25] is methodologically clean, the pipeline matches their realtime result with simple-top-3
and improves on it with family-budget allocation; crucially, the discovered constraints are quali-
tatively distinct from those the model-text-only approach finds, illustrating the complementary
nature of the two pipelines (Section 5.3).
3. Empirical evidence that adding literature-standard hardening to three StreamLLM benchmark
models collapses median solver time from ≥1800 s to under 20 s (Section 3), motivating
evaluation of streamliner-synthesis methods only on hardened baselines where streamliner
discovery is the residual lever rather than recovery of missing model constraints.
4. Afamily-budget portfolio allocationmechanism that uses LLM-generated constraint descriptors
as semantic family tags to enforce both inter-family and intra-family diversity in the deployed
portfolio (Section 4.5). At k = 3 families with m = 3 members per family, the mechanism
improves over simple top-3 selection on every problem in our suite without any increase
in compute envelope; the largest gain is on Black Hole, where the simple-top-3 portfolio is
dominated by redundant pile-top variants (Section 6.2).
2 Related Work
Streamlining and its automation.Gomes and Sellmann introduced streamlining as a principled
incomplete-search technique for constraint satisfaction problems [ 13]: the search is restricted to
a structurally typical sub-family of solutions in exchange for substantially reduced search effort.
3

The technique has been extended to constructive procedures [ 14] and applied with manual designs
to spatially-balanced Latin squares [ 21], with striking results on individual problem families but
expensive replication across new problems. This motivated work on automated streamliner synthesis.
Wetter, Akg¨ un, and Miguel [27] introduced a constraint-lattice search over the Essence modelling
language [10] via the Conjure constraint modeller [ 1], and Spracklenet al.[ 22, 23, 24] extended this
with Monte-Carlo Tree Search, optimisation-problem support, and portfolio-based instance selection.
The approach is sound and the portfolio framework gives strong empirical results, but the candidate
space is fundamentally bounded by the grammar: constraint shapes that fall outside the authors’
atomic vocabulary cannot be discovered. Our work extends the candidate space by extracting
structural patterns directly from observed solutions and translating them into candidate constraints
via a Large Language Model, removing the grammar bound while retaining the validation-driven
filtering of the portfolio approach.
The most recent work in this area is StreamLLM [ 25]: a Large Language Model is prompted
with the MiniZinc problem model and asked to emit candidate streamliners with closed-loop runtime
feedback, removing the grammar bound that the bottom-up methods carry. The authors are
methodologically transparent about constraint types: their Table 1 classifies each winning constraint
as implied ( i), symmetry-breaking ( s), satisfaction-non-preserving ( -), or uncertain ( u); and they
observe that the one benchmark model retaining its standard symmetry breaking (BIBD) yields
more modest improvements than the others. Our work differs from theirs in two respects. First, the
LLM in our pipeline reasons aboutobserved solution structurevia a CNN pattern recognizer rather
than the model text alone. Second, we evaluate the synthesis pipeline on benchmark models with
literature-standard hardening already applied, isolating the streamliner-discovery contribution from
the recovery of missing model constraints.
Constraint acquisition.A separate research area learns explicit constraint models from example
solutions. ModelSeeker [ 3] performs algebraic matching against a global-constraint catalogue to
extract per-relation constraints from positive examples; subsequent constraint-acquisition systems use
similar template-driven matching against fixed catalogues [4]. These systems target the construction
ofsatisfiability-preservingmodels from data and are template-bounded by their target constraint
catalogue. Our pipeline targets a different artefact (streamliners, which are explicitly satisfiability-
non-preserving) and does not require a target catalogue: candidate constraints are generated by the
LLM conditioned on observed solution structure, not matched against a known set of patterns.
Deep learning and language models for combinatorial reasoning.A separate line of work
applies deep learning directly to combinatorial reasoning. SATNet [ 26] and NeuroSAT [20] learn
end-to-end neural solvers for SAT. Neither extracts human-readable constraints or plugs back into a
CP solver, so the systems are complementary to ours rather than competing. More recent LLM-
driven approaches share our pattern of using a language model to propose candidate formal artefacts
validated by a sound downstream procedure: FunSearch [ 17] generates candidate program fragments
evaluated against an automated scorer for combinatorial discovery; Lemur [ 28] integrates LLMs
into automated program verification; and Peiet al.[ 16] ask whether LLMs can hypothesise loop
invariants, with the hypotheses checked by a verifier. Our pipeline shares this generate-and-validate
structure but applies it to streamliner synthesis for CP, with the additional ingredient of CNN-based
pattern recognition over enumerated solutions providing the LLM’s evidential grounding.
Feature interpretation in CNNs.Our use of CNN filter–property correlation has a direct
antecedent in the Network Dissection framework [2], which associates individual filters with semantic
4

Table 1: Baseline solve-time distribution on StreamLLM test instances. Chuffed 0.13.1, 1800 s
timeout.
ProblemNSAT / UNKN Median (s)
Unhardened Hardened Unhardened Hardened
Hypergraph Coloring 94 36 / 58 94 / 0 1800 0.2
Vessel Loading 51 21 / 30 48 / 3 1800 15
Social Golfers 61 27 / 34 38 / 23 1670 1045
concepts by matching activation maps against a hand-labelled concept dataset. Our setting is
simpler in that the “concepts” are algorithmically computable structural properties (row sums,
adjacent-pair statistics, and so on) rather than human-annotated semantic categories. The goal
is also different: we use the correlations to rank which properties the LLM should reason about
during constraint synthesis, rather than to interpret a vision-trained network.
3 Benchmark Context: Hardening and Streamliner Evaluation
Before presenting our method we take a page to situate the evaluation. Because streamliners do not
preserve satisfiability, a CP practitioner will typically exhaust sound options (standard symmetry
breaking, implied constraints, redundant constraints) before reaching for streamlining. This makes
the choice of baseline model important for evaluating any automated streamliner synthesiser. We
report a small empirical observation on the benchmark suite used by StreamLLM [ 25]: on several of
their problems the as-shipped baseline model omits literature-standard hardening, and adding those
constraints substantially changes the instance distribution.
For three of StreamLLM’s benchmark problems we compared the solve-time distribution of the
as-shipped MiniZinc model against a hardened variant that adds standard constraints from the
literature (for Social Golfers, the week-1 canonical partition combined with a golfer-1 group anchor
and an inter-week lex ordering [ 9]; for Vessel Loading, a lex-leader symmetry break over identical
containers and an orientation canonicalisation for square containers; for Hypergraph Coloring,
value-precedence on colour labels and the implied vertex-count sum). Per-problem MiniZinc for
these additions appears in Section A. Figure 1 and Table 1 report the result.
Figure 1: Chuffed baseline solve-time distributions for three StreamLLM benchmark problems before
and after literature-standard hardening (all instances). Red: unhardened; blue: hardened. Dashed
vertical at 1800 s timeout.
5

The most striking effect is on Hypergraph Coloring, where adding the value-precedence chain
and the colour-count identity reduces the median test baseline to 0 .2 s and collapses the timeout
count to zero. Vessel Loading sees a similar tail compression: the median drops from 1800 s to 15 s
and the unknown count from 30 of 51 to 3. Social Golfers is meaningfully improved by hardening
but remains non-trivial.
The practical implication is that for these problems sound hardening is not just methodologically
prior to streamlining; it is also where the largest performance gains come from. Implied and symmetry-
breaking constraints are guaranteed to preserve satisfiability, deliver the order-of-magnitude baseline
compressions reported in Table 1, and are the natural first move when a CP practitioner faces a slow
benchmark model. Streamliners, which are not solution-preserving, are a last-resort lever, justified
only after standard sound techniques have been applied. An automated streamliner synthesiser
evaluated against an unhardened baseline risks rediscovering constraints a practitioner would have
added by hand before attempting any streamlining at all. The reported speedups therefore conflate
two distinct effects: the recovery of missing sound constraints (gains that would disappear once the
model is properly hardened) and genuine beyond-hardening streamliner discovery. Only the latter is
the intended contribution of the streamlining literature, and reporting the two together conflates
what streamlining actually achieves with the recovery of missing model constraints.
This observation is not a criticism of StreamLLM’s contribution; they have been transparent
about constraint types throughout. Rather, it informs our evaluation choice. For the remainder of
this paper we evaluate our method on hardened variants ofSocial Golfers(Section 5.4) andVessel
Loading(Section 5.5), where literature-standard symmetry breaking and implied constraints are
already in place and genuine streamliner discovery is the remaining lever. We additionally include
Black Hole(Section 5.3) as a third evaluation problem. Black Hole has no canonical hardening:
its sequence is semantically ordered and the decision variables admit no natural relabelling group,
so neither symmetry-breaking nor implied-constraint additions are available. This makes it the one
problem in our suite where a direct head-to-head with StreamLLM is methodologically clean, as both
pipelines must discover genuine streamliners and neither can recover a missing model constraint.
3.1 Composite test set construction
A practical consequence of evaluating on hardened models is that many of StreamLLM’s distributed
test instances become trivial under hardening, leaving little baseline solve time for any streamliner
to reduce. We address this by drawing test instances from two peer-reviewed sources: the Stream-
LLM [25] test sets and the automated-streamliner-portfolios artefact accompanying Spracklenet
al.[ 24]. Both sets were generated by the same informative-instance-generation framework, AutoIG,
of Danget al.[ 8]. We retain only test instances on which the hardened baseline returns SAT within
a 3600 s timeout: the regime where the per-instance speedup metric is well-defined. For Social
Golfers this yields 61 test instances (52 from [ 25], 9 from [ 24]); for Vessel Loading, 22 test instances
(4 from [25], 18 from [24]); for Black Hole, 49 of the 53 StreamLLM-distributed instances pass the
SAT-within-3600 s criterion (the remaining 4 have unknown baselines within the timeout and are
excluded). Black Hole has no canonical hardening, so the BH test set is drawn entirely from the
StreamLLM distribution without augmentation.
4 Pipeline
Grammar-based approaches [22, 23, 24] search a pre-specified constraint lattice: every candidate
is drawn from constraint shapes the designer anticipated, so anything outside the grammar is
unreachable by construction. StreamLLM [ 25] removes this ceiling by prompting an LLM directly
6

with the MiniZinc model text, freeing it to propose arbitrary constraint shapes. The cost is that
the LLM is then working from parametric knowledge alone: it knows what constraintslook likefor
this problem class, but has no evidence of what patterns actually hold in the feasible solutions of
the specific instance at hand. The obvious alternative (presenting the LLM with the enumerated
solutions directly and asking it to find patterns) is impractical: even a modest corpus of 500 solutions
for a 52 × 52 Black Hole instance amounts to tens of thousands of numbers, and LLMs are poorly
suited to reasoning over raw numerical arrays at that scale, both in terms of context budget and
in terms of the kind of systematic pattern-finding the task demands, a limitation we encountered
directly when testing uncompressed solution payloads during development.
Our pipeline keeps the LLM’s generative freedom while replacing parametric guessing with
grounded evidence. The key observation is that a CNN trained to distinguish genuine solutions
from perturbed non-solutionsmustbe detecting real structural regularities: if its filters can reliably
separate the two classes, they are responding to patterns that exist in the solution set rather than
artefacts of the model text. We extract those filters as explicit references to solution-level structure
and pass them to the LLM, giving it a concrete signal to reason about rather than asking it to
hypothesise in the dark. The result is constraint synthesis that is both unconstrained in shape
(the LLM can propose any MiniZinc expression) and anchored in observed evidence (the proposed
constraint must explain a pattern the CNN demonstrably found).
Figure 2 sketches the end-to-end flow. The pipeline factors into four stages: solution enumeration,
contrastive CNN training, LLM-driven constraint synthesis along two prompting paths, and multi-
instance pooling with validation.
4.1 Solution enumeration and encoding
Given a MiniZinc model and a training instance, we enumerate at least N = 500 feasible solutions
using Chuffed [6] with the all solutions flag (more when the per-instance enumeration budget
allows; some training instances supply several thousand solutions). Each solution is encoded as
a 2D or 3D tensor whose shape matches the decision variable’s structure: scalar grayscale for
matrix problems, permutation matrix for 1-D permutations, one-hot encoding for assignment-style
problems, and a customcontainer rasterisationfor multi-variable packing problems such as Vessel
Loading (where the decision variables encode container coordinates rather than a single matrix).
This tensor representation is what the CNN operates on; the original MiniZinc decision variable is
also retained so the LLM can be shown raw solution samples in their original shape.
We additionally compute a problem-shape-specific library of ≈ 30 structural properties per
solution: row sums, column sums, diagonal sums, value ranges, monotonicity indicators, adjacent
position differences, positional centroids, extremum locations, and similar invariants. The exact set
is conditional on the variable shape, but each property is a real-valued summary of one solution. A
property whose value is constant across all enumerated solutions is animpliedconsequence of the
original constraints (never useful as a streamliner). A property whose value lies in a narrow band
across solutions, but is not strictly constant, is a first-class streamliner candidate: tight bounds
near the observed range often retain satisfiability while pruning aggressively.
Problem applicability.The pipeline applies to any CSP whose decision variables can be encoded
as a fixed-shape 2D or 3D tensor. Matrix problems (Latin squares, BIBD, magic squares) map
naturally to grayscale images; permutation problems (N-Queens, Black Hole) to binary permutation
matrices; assignment problems to one-hot encodings; and packing problems with coordinate variables
(Vessel Loading) to rasterised spatial maps. The key requirement is that the solution structure is
spatially regular enough for a convolutional filter to detect recurring patterns: problems whose
7

training
instance
solution
enumeration
Nfeasible
solutions
∼30 structural
properties
tensor
encoding
perturbed
negatives
contrastive
CNN training
filter–property
correlations
filter-contrast
solution pairs
LLM
(llm stats)
LLM
(llm discovery)
candidate
pool
LLM semantic
clustering
two-phase
validation
validated streamliners
Figure 2: End-to-end pipeline from a MiniZinc model and training instance to a pool of validated
streamliners. Stages are colour-coded:blue= solution preparation,orange= CNN pattern
recognition,green= LLM constraint synthesis,grey= validation. Solutions are enumerated and
encoded into tensors; a CNN is trained contrastively against perturbed negatives and emits two
complementary signals: per-filter property correlations and high/low filter-activation solution pairs.
Two LLM-prompting paths consume these signals: llm stats reasons over property statistics
with the correlation prior, and llm discovery hypothesises constraints from the contrast pairs.
Candidates from both paths are pooled across training instances and ensemble seeds, semantically
clustered, and validated in two phases against cached baselines.
8

solutions have highly variable structure across instances, or whose decision variables do not admit
a natural 2D layout, are less suitable candidates. A concrete negative example is Steiner Triple
Systems, where every feasible solution has identical row sums, column sums, and pair counts by
construction; the property library finds nothing with non-zero variance and the llm stats path
produces no useful candidates (Section 7). Conversely, graph colouring, scheduling, and routing
problems with a fixed underlying topology are natural future targets, provided the encoding maps
the problem’s structure to a spatially interpretable representation (e.g. adjacency matrix or timeline
grid) before the CNN stage.
4.2 Contrastive CNN training and pattern recognition
Per-instance, we train a 3-layer Convolutional Neural Network (32 →64→128 channels, 3×3 kernels,
batch normalisation, ReLU) contrastively on enumerated solutions versusnegative samples: tensors
generated by perturbing a feasible solution into a structurally close but typically infeasible configu-
ration. We use three negative generators per solution shape (row-permuted, position-swapped, and
fully uniform-random) and balance positives and negatives one-to-one. The classification objective
forces the CNN to learn filters that detect structural patterns the feasibility predicate exploits:
filters that activate on real solutions and not on random arrangements of the same domain values.
The CNN’s signal is surfaced in two complementary ways for downstream constraint synthesis.
Filter selection operates across all three conv layers: for each layer we rank filters by per-solution
mean-activation variance and retain the top six per layer (eighteen filters in total; figures in this paper
show the top three for visual clarity). This keeps both shallow filters that detect local primitives (e.g.
adjacency patterns) and deeper filters that compose those primitives into longer-range structure;
both are useful inputs for the LLM’s constraint synthesis, and pre-committing to one depth would
discard signal. In practice, however, the most spatially interpretable constraint-discovery signal in
our evaluation was concentrated in the first convolutional layer: the deeper layers showed broadly
similar spatial patterns without clear evidence of qualitatively distinct hierarchical features. Whether
multi-layer extraction adds meaningful constraint-discovery value over a shallower architecture
remains an open question (Section 7).
First, we compute Pearson correlations between each retained filter’s per-solution activation vector
and each structural property’s per-solution value vector. Properties with high |r| correlations are
properties the CNN’s discriminative behaviour explains, and hence first-class targets for streamlining.
Second, we identify high-activation and low-activation solution pairs under each retained filter; these
contrast pairs feed the filter-contrast LLM path described below.
We use an ensemble of K = 3 random initialisation seeds per training instance to reduce
filter-selection variance: different CNN initialisations learn slightly different filter bases, and pooling
candidates across the ensemble yields a more robust relevance ranking than any single seed.
Figure 3 renders this learned structure on a Black Hole training instance: every top-variance
filter at layer 0 encodes the rank-adjacency rule that defines the problem.
4.3 LLM-driven constraint synthesis
The CNN’s pattern-recognition output and the per-property statistics are translated into candidate
MiniZinc streamliners by a Large Language Model along two prompting paths.
Statistics path (llm stats).We assemble a JSON payload containing (i) per-property summary
statistics (mean, standard deviation, range, near-constant flag, median); (ii) the top three CNN
filters by absolute correlation for each property, ranked; (iii) up to five raw sample solutions in their
9

Figure 3: Mean activation maps for the three top-variance features.0 filters of a CNN trained
contrastively on Black Hole solutions versus near-miss negatives (training instance 1191; mean
over the enumerated-solutions corpus). Each filter exhibits a zigzag/staircase signature: the rank-
adjacency constraint forces consecutive sequence positions to play cards of adjacent rank, so the 1s
in neighbouring rows of the permutation matrix shift by a small column offset as the rank walk
ascends or descends, tracing a diagonal staircase across the canvas. The CNN learns this dominant
rank-adjacency structure without being told what to look for; this signal is what grounds the
LLM constraint synthesis in Section 4.3. Deeper layers ( features.3, features.6) track the same
primitive at longer composition lengths.
original variable shape; and (iv) when training on multiple instances of varying size, a per-property
progression table that allows the LLM to extrapolate bounds parametrically in n rather than pinning
to a single observation. The prompt instructs the LLM to emit a JSON array of candidate MiniZinc
constraints, each tagged with the originating property, anaggressivenesslevel (conservative=
bound has a safety margin past the observed extreme;tight-fit= bound matches the observed
extreme;aggressive= bound is the LLM’s parametric extrapolation, possibly tighter than any
observation), and a syntactic form (existential, universal, aggregate, pairwise). We sample multiple
(form, aggregation, aggressiveness) combinations per call to avoid the LLM collapsing into a single
shape.
Filter-contrast path ( llm discovery).For each top-variance CNN filter we partition the
solution corpus into a high-activation group and a low-activation group, pass both as labelled
numerical data to the LLM, and ask it to hypothesise what structural pattern distinguishes the two
groups. The prompt asks for a textual hypothesis followed by a candidate MiniZinc constraint that
encodes the hypothesised pattern. Unlike the statistics path, this path does not anchor the LLM to
a predefined property library: the LLM is free to propose constraint shapes outside the property
catalogue, including multi-variable structural relationships and non-trivial canonicalisations that
the property statistics alone do not suggest.
Mechanical templates (briefly).For comparison we also implemented a deterministic template
path: near-constant properties at observed value k instantiate constraint p = k directly, with
similar mechanical substitutions for monotonicity flags and extremum-shaped properties. Templates
are reproducible and cost-free, but in our hardened-model evaluation they consistently underperform
both LLM paths, which generalise to constraint shapes the templates do not encode. We retain
10

templates as a baseline-stage in the pipeline but report them only when relevant.
All three sources (statistics path, filter-contrast path, and templates) emit method-tagged
candidates that are text-deduplicated on exact constraint string. Templates are preserved as a
baseline column in the validation pool but on the hardened-evaluation regime contribute no headline
picks (Figure 7).
4.4 Multi-instance pooling and validation
The previous stages run independently on each of M training instances. We pool all method-
tagged candidates across instances and seeds, and a second LLM call performs semantic clustering:
candidates whose constraint shapes match modulo parameter substitution are grouped, and from
each cluster we expand up to four representatives (tightest, loosest, parametric median, and an
extrapolated variant) into the validation candidate set. Semantic clustering is necessary because
text deduplication misses parametrically-equivalent constraints that arise across different instance
sizes.
Each candidate is evaluated on the training instances to filter to those that improve over baseline
somewhere and to produce the training-set savings score used for portfolio selection (Section 4.5).
Each solve is capped at the baseline time on the same instance (a streamliner slower than baseline
is not useful) and per-pair results are incrementally checkpointed so that the pipeline is resumable.
The final reported metrics (Section 5) are computed on the held-out test instances described in
Section 3.1; no separate validation set is used between training and test.
4.5 Portfolio deployment via family-budget allocation
The validated candidate pool is the input to a portfolio selection step that produces the deployed
streamliner set. The natural baseline rule (simple top- k: rank candidates by training-set savings
and pick the top- k) is blind to a structural property of the LLM-driven pool: constraint variants
of the same shape (different aggressiveness levels, different parameter regimes) typically all rank
highly because they all save substantial training time, but contribute redundantly to the deployed
portfolio. On Black Hole, the simple top-3 picks are all variants of the pile-top y-coordinate bound;
the deployed compute budget is dominated by one constraint family even though the pool contains
other useful shapes. We diagnose this in Section 6.2.
We deploy afamily-budget portfolio allocationthat explicitly enforces both inter-family and intra-
family diversity. The mechanism repurposes the LLM’s own constraint descriptors (short snake-case
labels emitted alongside each synthesised constraint: pile top early 25, max adj diff aggressive,
rank walk endpoints, etc.) as semantic family tags; candidates are bucketed by descriptor prefix.
For a deployment ofkfamilies withmmembers per family:
1. Select the top k families ranked by the highest individual training-set savings of any member
of that family.
2. Within each selected family, retain the topmmembers by individual training-set savings.
3. Race all k·m retained streamliners against the baseline. Each family receives a wall-clock
budget equal to the baseline time; within a family, the m retained members share that budget
equally (slot = tbase/m). A streamliner “succeeds” for its family if it returns SAT within
its slot. The family’s contribution is the wall-clock time at which its first member returns
SAT (not the individual streamliner’s solve time), or the baseline time if no member succeeds.
Portfolio time per instance is the minimum of thekfamily contributions and the baseline.
11

Total compute is identical to a simple top- k (k + 1)-way race: k family-races plus the baseline solve,
with each family-race using tbase of compute distributed across m slots. Critically, each individual
streamliner receiveslesswall-clock time than in a simple top- k race (slot = tbase/m rather than
tbase); the family-budget allocation trades per-streamliner time for coverage across aggressiveness
levels, not additional compute. Two complementary diversity properties motivate this allocation.
Inter-familydiversity (controlled by k) ensures the portfolio covers structurally distinct constraint
shapes.Intra-familydiversity (controlled by m) covers different aggressiveness levels and parameter
regimes within each shape. We expect diminishing returns in m because variants within a family
target the same property and share retention behaviour at the margin; we observe this empirically
(Section 6.3, with the sweet spot atm= 3).
Throughout the evaluation we deploy family-budget allocation at k = 3, m = 3, yielding a
portfolio of 9 streamliners across 3 families per problem. We additionally report simple top-3
numbers as a comparison baseline; for direct comparison with prior work [ 25] on Black Hole we
keep the simple top-3 reading as well.
The mechanism is independent of the LLM that generated the constraints: any constraint-
synthesis pipeline whose pool members carry semantic labels (or that admits a downstream clustering
pass) can adopt the same allocation. In our case the labels are free (the LLM emits them as part
of each constraint’s description during synthesis, Section 4.3), so family-budget allocation adds no
incremental cost to the pipeline.
5 Evaluation
5.1 Experimental setup
Solver and protocol.We use the Chuffed 0.13.1 solver [6] under MiniZinc 2.9.5 [15], with a
3600 s wall-clock timeout and a fixed random seed (42) for every solve. Baselines are computed once
per test instance and cached; each streamlined solve is individually capped at the cached baseline
time on the same instance (a streamliner that runs longer than the baseline is by construction
unhelpful). Our CNN is trained for 100 epochs per training instance with an ensemble of K = 3
random seeds. Constraint synthesis uses Anthropic’s Claude Opus models. We additionally tested
locally hosted open-weight models via Ollama ( qwen2.5-coder:14b, the largest model our hardware
could run), but the generated MiniZinc was not reliable enough to sustain the synthesis pass; the
open-weight limitation is discussed further in Section 7.
Hardware.All experiments ran on a single workstation: an Intel Core i7-13700K CPU (16 cores,
24 threads, up to 5 .4 GHz), 32 GB of system memory, an NVIDIA GeForce RTX 4090 GPU (24 GB
VRAM), and a 1 TB SSD. The host OS is Ubuntu 22 .04 on WSL2 (Linux kernel 5 .15) and the full
pipeline executes inside Docker (Python 3.11, PyTorch, MiniZinc 2.9.5 with the Chuffed solver).
CNN training uses the GPU; baseline and streamlined solves use Chuffed on a single CPU thread
per solver process, with parallel portfolio races scheduled across separate processes. Each solver
process runs under runsolver [19], which enforces per-solve wall-clock and memory limits and
returns a clean timeout signal rather than relying on solver-internal termination.
Test sets.For Black Hole we use the StreamLLM-distributed test instances [ 25] unmodified
(Section 3 explains why no canonical hardening applies to BH). For hardened Social Golfers and
Vessel Loading we use the composite test set described in Section 3: the union of the StreamLLM-
distributed instances and the automated-streamliner-portfolios artefact [ 24], restricted to instances
12

on which the hardened baseline returns SAT within the 3600 s timeout. This yields 61 instances
for hardened Social Golfers (52 from [ 25], 9 from [ 24]), 22 for hardened Vessel Loading (4 and
18 respectively), and 49 of 53 StreamLLM Black Hole instances (the remaining 4 have unknown
baselines within 3600 s and are excluded by the same SAT-within- timeout criterion applied to the
SG and VL test sets).
Metrics.For each test instance i let tb(i) be the cached baseline solve time andtc(i) the streamlined
solve time of candidate c. The per-instance speedup is tb(i)/tc(i) when both return SAT. Aggregated
metrics reported below:
• Portfolio time savings.We race the deployed portfolio (either simple top-3 or family-budget)
against the baseline in parallel and report ( P tb(i) − P twinner(i))/ P tb(i), where twinner(i) is
the wall-clock time of the first process (streamliner or baseline) to return SAT on instance i.
For simple top-3 this is a 4-way race; for family-budget at k = 3, m = 3 it is a 10-way race
within the same total compute envelope. This mirrors the metric reported in Figure 3 of [ 25],
converted from their reduction form 1−t new/told.
• Pool ceiling.At each instance we pick the single fastest SAT-returning streamliner across the
entirevalidated pool (all candidates, not just the deployed subset), then aggregate. This is an
oracle upper bound: no runtime selection scheme drawing from the same pool can exceed it.
The gap between a deployed portfolio (simple top-3 or family-budget, both of which select a
small subset of the pool) and the ceiling quantifies how much selection inefficiency leaves on
the table.
• Best-single geometric-mean speedup.For the single top-performing streamliner per problem,
the geometric mean of per-instance speedups over instances where both the streamliner and
the baseline returned SAT. This complements the portfolio metric: a streamliner with high
per-instance speedup but narrow SAT-retention is rewarded here even if it does not survive
portfolio aggregation.
• CPU-adjusted time savings.The ( k + 1)-way race consumes up to ( k + 1) times the CPU of a
lone baseline solve, since all parallel processes run until the winner finishes. We therefore also
reportCPU-adjusted savings (P tb(i) − (k + 1) P twinner(i))/ P tb(i) as an honest accounting
of total compute cost. We regard the wall-clock figure as the primary practical metric: modern
hardware routinely provides the spare cores needed to run a small parallel portfolio at no
wall-clock penalty, and this is the deployment model assumed by StreamLLM [25]; Spracklenet
al.[ 24] account for CPU cost explicitly in their portfolio evaluation. The CPU-adjusted figure
is reported for completeness and for practitioners operating under strict compute budgets.
Selection rule.Throughout the evaluation we deploy the family-budget allocation introduced
in Section 4.5 at k = 3 families and m = 3 members per family, racing 9 streamliners against the
baseline within the same compute envelope as a 4-way race. As a comparison baseline we also
report the simple top-3 rule (rank pool members by training-set savings; deploy the top 3): this
is the natural single-streamliner-per-slot reading and the closest analogue to prior portfolio work.
Family-budget is our default deployment; simple top-3 is reported alongside for direct comparison
with prior published portfolios.
13

Table 2: Portfolio time savings across all three problems.Pool ceilingis an oracle upper bound: at
each instance, the single fastest SAT-returning streamliner from the full validated pool.FB →ceiling
gapis the residual between family-budget and the pool ceiling. StreamLLM comparison is only
reported for Black Hole, the one problem where both pipelines face the same (unhardened) baseline.
Black Hole Hardened SG Hardened VL
(49 instances) (61 instances) (22 instances)
Simple top-3 79.7% 94.4% 97.4%
Family-budget (k= 3,m= 3) 89.4%98.6%98.8%
Pool ceiling 94.9% 98.7% 99.6%
FB→ceiling gap 5.5 pp 0.1 pp 0.8 pp
StreamLLM (realtime, Fig. 3)≈80% — —
5.2 Overview: speedup heatmap
Figure 4 gives a bird’s-eye view of the full validated pool across all three problems before the
per-problem analysis. Each row is one validated streamliner, ordered by SAT-retention count; each
column is one test instance, ordered by baseline solve time. Colour encodes log10 speedup where the
streamliner returns SAT; purple marks instances rendered unsatisfiable; dark grey marks timeout or
no result.
Figure 4: Speedup heatmap across all validated streamliners and test instances for Black Hole
(23 streamliners, 49 instances), Social Golfers (23 streamliners, 61 instances), and Vessel Loading
(40 streamliners, 22 instances). Rows are ordered by SAT-retention count (highest coverage first);
columns by baseline solve time (easiest left). Colour encodes log10 speedup on SAT-retained instances
(yellow ≈ 1×, dark red ≥ 1000×); purple = UNSAT; dark grey = timeout or no result. The BH
block rows 20–23 (all dark grey) are the template candidates, which contribute nothing on this
evaluation regime.
Table 2 summarises the headline portfolio metrics across all three problems.
14

5.3 Black Hole
Black Hole [11, 12] is a single-player card game encoded as a CSP: arrange 51 of 52 playing cards
into a sequence and a layout of 17 piles of 3 cards, such that each consecutive pair of cards in the
sequence differs by ±1 modulo 13 (rank adjacency) and a small set of layout constraints relating
piles to the sequence are satisfied. The key decision variables are x[p], the card at position p in
the play sequence, and y[c], its inverse (the position of card c in the sequence). The parameter
layout[i,j] gives the card in pile i at depth j, so layout[i,1] is the initial top card of pile i, the
only card in that pile that is accessible at the start of the game.
Pipeline output.Training on the 16 StreamLLM training instances, our pipeline generates a pool
of 23 candidate streamliners (6 from the LLM-statistics path, 4 from the template path, 13 from the
LLM-discovery path). The simple-top-3 ranking (training-savings only) selects three pool members
all from the LLM-discoverypile-topfamily (we useking-pinas shorthand for the terminal-card
constraint(x[52]-1) mod 13 = 12, which requires the last card played to be a King):
1.forall(i in 1..17)(y[layout[i,1]] <= 25)
2.forall(i in 1..17)(y[layout[i,1]] <= 35)
3.forall(i in 1..17)(y[layout[i,1]] <= 30)+ king-pin
Here layout[i,1] is theinitialtop card of pile i (before the game begins) and y[c] is the position
of card c in the play sequence. The model already enforces that a buried card cannot be played
before the card on top of it; the pile-top constraint says something stronger and non-obvious: the
17 initially-accessible cards do not merely precede their pile-mates, they cluster in the first K
positions of theglobal52-card sequence. A valid solution could in principle place a pile-top card
at move 48 and still satisfy rank-adjacency; the CNN observed across 2000 enumerated solutions
that this almost never happens. The filter-contrast path surfaced this pattern; the statistics path
missed it as the property library contains no y-coordinate aggregates over the layout indexing
array. This constraint is unreachable by any approach anchored to a fixed property library, and the
raw-solutions alternative is impractical at this data scale: exhaustively computing variance over all
variable-index combinations in a 52 × 52 encoding yields an unranked flood of near-constants with
no signal about which are discriminative. The CNN finds the pile-top pattern without being told to
look for layout coordinates: the contrastive objective attends to pile-top positions because they are
the most discriminative signal separating real solutions from perturbed near-misses.
The discovery mechanism in action.The llm discovery path operates in two comple-
mentary modes depending on how the CNN signal manifests. In thevariance-drivenmode, a
filter tracks a per-solution scalar property with non-trivial variance across the corpus: for ex-
ample, filter features.6[75] on training instance 1191 correlates strongly with theascending-
pairs count( r = +0 .57 across 2000 solutions), which counts the number of positions p where
x[p + 1] > x [p] (i.e. the card value increases from one sequence position to the next). The 3
highest-activation solutions under this filter have ascending-pairs counts of {29, 30, 29} out of
51 adjacent positions; the 3 lowest have {24, 26, 24}. The LLM receives these contrasting so-
lution groups as numerical data and converts the observed separation into a bound constraint
(sum(p in 1..51)(bool2int(x[p+1] > x[p])) <= 27 ). This filter is a non-deployed pool mem-
ber. On the test set the constraint retains SAT on 41 of 49 instances and improves on all of them,
but the geomean speedup is only 1 .1×: bounding the ascending-pairs count to ≤ 27 prunes very
15

little of the search space because most valid solutions naturally sit near that value (population mean
≈27.2, std≈1.5). The pile-top family dominates the deployment ranking by a wide margin.
In theinvariant-drivenmode, the CNN exposes a per-element pattern that holds almost
universally across the corpus. Per-pile y-coordinates are nearly invariant across the 2000 enumerated
solutions of instance 1191: 15 of 17 pile-top positions take a single value, and the remaining two
vary by ±1. Figure 5 makes this directly visible: in three arbitrary solutions sampled from the
corpus, the same 17 pile-top cards land at the same ( p, v) co-ordinates while the non-pile-top cards
visibly migrate. The LLM could read the maximum pile-top position (41 on this instance) from
the solution data and emit y[layout[i,1]] <= K at three aggressiveness levels; it is this family
that dominates the deployed portfolio. Both modes feed the same prompt; on Black Hole only the
invariant-driven branch produces deployed picks.
Figure 5: Per-pile y-coordinate invariance on Black Hole training instance 1191. Three arbitrary
solutions (positions 0, 500, 1000 in the enumerated corpus) rendered as 52 ×52 permutation matrices.
Red squares mark the 17 pile-top cards ( layout[i,1] for i∈ 1..17). The red-marked cells appear at
identical (p, v) co-ordinates in all three panels, while the unmarked cells (non-pile-top cards) visibly
migrate; the invariance is structural, not accidental. This figure shows one example of the pattern
the CNN exposes: for this deal, pile-top positions are fixed across solutions, suggesting a bound on
how early they appear in the sequence. Pinning pile-tops to exact positions would not generalise
across instances, since the deal changes per instance and different cards sit on top of the piles; a
parametric bound y[layout[i,1]] <= K captures the structural regularity without depending on
instance-specific card identities.
Family-budget portfolio.The simple top-3 ranking concentrates the deployed compute budget
on a single constraint family. The family-budget allocation (Section 4.5) at k = 3 instead selects three
different families (pile-top,max-adj-diff,rank-walk-endpoints) and retains the top m = 3 members
of each (9 streamliners total), racing them within the same compute envelope.Pile-topcontributes
its three aggressiveness-level variants;max-adj-diffcontributes a tight-fit and an aggressive variant;
rank-walkhas only one member at this pool size.
Results.Table 2 reports the headline portfolio metric. The deployed family-budget portfolio
achieves 89.4% time savings, comfortably above StreamLLM’s realtime configuration ( ≈80% from
their Figure 3) and recovering most of the way to the 94 .9% pool ceiling. The simple-top-3 reading
16

Table 3: Pile-top family: aggressiveness–coverage tradeoff on the 49 Black Hole test instances. SAT
= instances on which the streamliner returns SAT within the baseline cap; UNSAT = instances
rendered unsatisfiable. Geomean and max speedup computed over SAT instances only.
Variant SAT UNSAT Geomean speedup Max speedup
K= 25 (most aggressive) 26 23 1103×4547×
K= 30 + king-pin 18 31 225×10 470×
K= 35 (least aggressive) 39 10 10×51×
reaches 79.7%, closely matching StreamLLM’s published number for like-for-like comparison, but is
structurally limited by the within-pile-top redundancy of its three picks (diagnosed in Section 6.2).
The 9.7-percentage-point gap between simple-top-3 and family-budget is the structural improvement
the family-aware allocation buys.
The qualitative difference between the two pipelines’ discoveries is striking. StreamLLM’s
realtime BH triple ( x[26]=26, a rank-descent-forbidding forall, and x[52]=52) pins individual cards
to individual positions, constraints plausible from reading the model text alone. Our deployed family
operates on y[layout[i,1]], a compound expression that composes the layout parameter with the
positional variable to constrain all 17 pile-top cards to appear within the first K positions of the play
sequence. This cross-variable relationship is not visible in the model text; it emerges from observing
that pile-top positions are nearly invariant across the enumerated solution corpus. The contrast
illustrates the complementary roles of the two approaches: model-text-grounded synthesis recovers
plausible structural guesses, while solution-grounded synthesis discovers structural regularities that
only become visible in the solution distribution.
The best single streamliner, forall(i in 1..17)(y[layout[i,1]] <= 25) , at the most ag-
gressive end of the pile-top family — achieves a geometric-mean speedup of 1103 × over the 26 of 49
instances on which it retains satisfiability, with a maximum per-instance speedup of 4547 ×. Table 3
reports all three deployed pile-top variants and makes the aggressiveness–coverage tradeoff concrete.
Tightening the bound from K = 35 to K = 25 reduces SAT retention from 39 to 26 instances but lifts
the geometric-mean speedup from 10 × to 1103×: the constraint prunes so aggressively that where
it applies the solver barely searches. Soundness is instance-specific: whether y[layout[i, 1]] ≤K
holds depends on the particular Black Hole card layout, not on how hard the instance is to solve, so
baseline difficulty is not a predictor of SAT retention. The family-budget portfolio races all three
variants within the pile-top slot, covering the instances that the most aggressive member fails.
5.4 Hardened Social Golfers
Social Golfers [12] asks for a weekly schedule of g = npg ·n gr golfers (npg per group, ngr groups) into
nrounds weeks, such that no two golfers share a group more than once. We harden the StreamLLM-
distributed model with three literature-standard additions: a week-1 canonical partition, a golfer-1
group anchor, and an inter-week lex ordering (full constraint listings in Section A). Together these
collapse the standard SG symmetry group on the deployed baseline. Even with this hardening in
place, 61 of the test instances drawn from [ 25] and [24] remain solvable but non-trivially hard for the
baseline (median solve time on the order of minutes; total baseline wall-clock across the 61-instance
set is 19.0 h).
Results.Our pipeline produces a pool of 23 candidate streamliners on hardened SG (11 from
the LLM-statistics path, 12 from the LLM-discovery path). The deployed family-budget portfolio
17

achieves 98.6% portfolio time savings on the 61-instance test set, essentially matching the 98 .7%
pool ceiling (within 0 .1 pp). The simple-top-3 reading (comparison baseline) reaches 94 .4%; the
4.2-percentage-point improvement of family-budget over simple top-3 comes from including a second
variant of the sg_lex family in the deployed portfolio. The best single streamliner achieves a
geometric-mean speedup of 356 × over the 18 of 61 instances on which it retains satisfiability, with a
per-instance maximum of 2784×.
Statistics-path picks.The two statistics-path picks are both beyond-hardening canonicalisations:
1.(LLM-statistics)a closed-form algebraic assignment for week 2:
forall(g in Golfer)(assign[g, 2] =
((((g-1) div n_per_group)
+ ((g-1) mod n_per_group)) mod n_groups) + 1)
Filter features.3[4] correlates at |r| = 0.97 withsubsquare 2x2 sum variance, the variance
of 2 × 2 block sums in the scalar encoding, which is near-constant across all 2000 solutions
(std = 0.14). This givessubsquare 2x2 sum variancethe highest CNN endorsement among
all 30 properties, directing the LLM’s attention to 2 × 2 block structure as the load-bearing
signal. With this framing, the LLM inspects the raw sample solutions, observes that week-2
assignments follow a specific cyclic round-robin pattern relative to week 1, and derives the
algebraic formula. The CNN’s role here is to act as an attention mechanism, elevating the
right structural feature above the remaining properties so the LLM focuses on the correct part
of the solution structure.
2.(LLM-statistics)a per-golfer week-to-week change constraint excluding golfer 1:
forall(g in Golfer where g > 1, w in 1..n_rounds-1)
(assign[g, w] != assign[g, w+1])
This forbids any non-canonicalised golfer from being assigned to the same group on two
consecutive weeks. The stats path surfaced it via filter features.3[32], which correlates at
|r| = 0.85 with thehorizontal adjacency diffproperty (a measure of how much consecutive-
week group assignments differ across the solution). That property is near-constant with mean
1.32 and std 0 .009, indicating golfers almost never repeat a group in consecutive weeks in
valid solutions; the LLM reads this near-constant signal and emits the constraint. Validation
confirms this is a genuine streamliner: it retains satisfiability on 55 of 61 test instances (with
6 rendered unsatisfiable), confirming that valid solutions exist in which a golfer does occupy
the same group in consecutive weeks.
Both constraints are beyond-hardening canonicalisations that impose additional structure on
top of the standard hardening without being among the canonical lex-leader, value-precedence, or
week-permutation symmetry breaks; they are constraints the standard hardening does not capture.
What the CNN sees.Unlike Black Hole and Vessel Loading, Social Golfers produces nearly
uniform activation maps with no diagonal striping or geometric silhouette. The structural patterns
the CNN detects (consistent 2 × 2 block sums and horizontal edge regularity between consecutive
weeks) hold uniformly across the entire canvas, so filters fire at similar strength everywhere rather
than at identifiable positions. The CNN found real patterns, but they are diffuse rather than
localised, making spatial hotspot data less informative here than for BH or VL.
18

For the discovery path, diffuse activations give the LLM less positional evidence to anchor
on, and it falls back on prior-driven canonicalisation drawn from its knowledge of SG group-
permutation structure rather than reading a spatially-concentrated CNN signal. Where activations
are spatially concentrated (BH, VL), the discovery path extracts CNN-grounded geometric constraints
(Section 5.5); where they are flat, as here, the CNN’s contribution is through the stats-path correlation
ranking rather than spatial signal.
5.5 Hardened Vessel Loading
Vessel Loading [ 12] is a 2D rectangular-packing problem: place n_containers rectangles on a
deck_width by deck_length deck such that containers of incompatible classes respect minimum
separation distances. We harden the StreamLLM-distributed model with two additions: a lex-
leader symmetry break over identical containers, and a square-container orientation canonicalisation
(full constraint listings in Section A). Because the baseline VL model permits container rotation,
this hardening is more substantial than the symmetry break on Social Golfers and substantially
compresses the baseline solve-time distribution. Even after hardening, however, the 22-instance
composite test set retains a meaningful distribution of harder cases drawn from [ 24] (total baseline
wall-clock 6.1 h).
What the CNN sees.Figure 6 renders the learned filter activations on a representative VL
training instance. VL solutions are rasterised to a deck length×deck width grid where each cell
holds the class ID of the container occupying that position (zero for empty); the CNN therefore
sees a spatial map of the deck. In each activation panel, columns correspond to the x-axis (Left
coordinate, left deck wall at column 0), rows to the y-axis (Bottom coordinate), and colour encodes
filter response strength (dark purple = no activation, teal/green = moderate activation over the
main deck region, bright yellow = peak activation). Across the top-variance features.0 filters
the same silhouette recurs: thin vertical bands at the deck walls, a dominant interior region, and
a consistent bright bottom-left hot-spot. The discovery-path picks are precisely the constraints
this geometry would suggest: a global rotation suppression keying on the canonical orientation
visible in the silhouette, and a same-class horizontal-clustering bound keying on the bottom-left
hot-spot’s locality. The LLM is reading the activation maps in this case rather than relying on
problem-description priors alone: what the CNN exposes spatially, the LLM converts into a packing
heuristic.
Results.Our pipeline produces a pool of 40 candidate streamliners on hardened VL (23 from
the LLM-statistics path, 17 from the LLM-discovery path). The deployed family-budget portfolio
achieves 98.8% portfolio time savings on the 22-instance test set, recovering most of the way to
the 99.6% pool ceiling. The simple-top-3 reading reaches 97 .4%, already close to the pool ceiling
on this problem; the family-budget improvement is modest (1 .4 pp) because VL’s pool is already
near-saturated under simple-top-3. The best single streamliner achieves a geometric-mean speedup
of 932× over the 17 of 22 instances on which it retains satisfiability, with a maximum per-instance
speedup of 8389×.
Illustrative pool picks.Three constraints from different families illustrate the range of structure
the pipeline discovers, mixing both LLM paths:
1.(LLM-statistics)an orientation-aware left-edge bound on containers smaller than the deck:
19

Figure 6: Mean activation maps for the three highest-variance features.0 filters trained con-
trastively on Vessel Loading solutions versus packing near-miss negatives (training instance
0051e4a17e...; mean over the enumerated-solutions corpus). Columns = Left coordinate ( x-
axis of deck); rows = Bottom coordinate (y-axis); colour encodes activation strength (dark purple =
none, teal/green = moderate activation over the main deck region, yellow = peak). Across most
filters the same silhouette recurs: vertical bands at the deck walls, a dominant interior region, and
a consistent bright bottom-left hot-spot. The bottom-left hot-spot is the spatial signal the LLM-
discovery path converts into the packing-heuristic streamliners ( Bottom[c] mod 2 = 0 , same-class
Leftclustering) representative of the discovery-path pool.
forall(c in Containers
where max(width[c], length[c]) <= deck_width)
(Left[c] <= deck_width - max(width[c], length[c]))
This enforces that any container that fits within the deck width in either orientation must be
placed so that its left edge plus its larger dimension does not exceed the deck width, a packing-
tightness constraint that handles both rotations. The CNN signal came from themean Left all
andstd Left allproperties ( |r|> 0.94 across all three ensemble seeds), indicating that Left
coordinates are tightly constrained in valid solutions. The LLM uses this signal as a cue and
derives the orientation-aware formula from the model structure: neither alone produces the
constraint. It retains satisfiability on 18 of 22 test instances with a geometric-mean speedup
of 439×.
2.(LLM-statistics)a bottom-edge grid-alignment constraint:
forall(c in Containers)(Bottom[c] mod 2 = 0)
This requires every container’s bottom edge to land on an even y-coordinate. The constraint
is not in the model and cannot be derived from reading it; it is an emergent property of the
specific container dimensions in these instances. When containers with even-valued heights are
packed starting from y = 0, each successive bottom edge naturally lands on an even coordinate,
and the CNN detects this regularity via then boundariesproperty (—r— = 0.97), which is
near-constant across all solutions. The LLM translates “container edges consistently align to
even grid positions” into the mod-2 constraint. By halving the candidate y-coordinates for
every container simultaneously, it prunes the search space dramatically: 16 of 22 test instances
retain satisfiability with a geometric-mean speedup of 646×.
20

3.(LLM-discovery)a same-class horizontal clustering constraint:
forall(c, k in Containers
where c < k /\ class[c] = class[k])
(abs(Left[c] - Left[k]) <= deck_width div 3)
The CNN’s activation maps expose a spatial regularity: in high-activation solutions, containers
sharing the same cargo class are consistently co-located in the same region of the deck rather
than spread across it. The LLM reads this clustering signal and translates it into a proximity
bound: any two same-class containers must have their left edges within one-third of the deck
width of each other. This complements the symmetry break onidenticalcontainers (which
requires matching width and length as well as class) by restricting the horizontal spread of
same-class containers regardless of their dimensions. It retains satisfiability on 18 of 22 test
instances with a geometric-mean speedup of 654 ×. Notably, the LLM generates this bound
without referencing the separation matrix already in the model, which specifies the minimum
required distance between containers of each class pair. A more precise version could derive
a bound consistent with those separation values; this illustrates the prompt-improvement
direction discussed in Section 8.
The hardened VL winners arestructural packing heuristicsrather than further canonicalisations:
they restrict where containers are placed and how their classes relate, rather than canonicalising
the symmetry orbit of the hardened baseline. This is a different kind of structure from the Social
Golfers winners and reflects VL’s geometric, rather than symmetric, residual structure.
6 Analysis
6.1 Which LLM path carries the headline?
A natural question given the two-path design is whether one path dominates the other. Figure 7
addresses this by plotting every validated streamliner as a point on the SAT-retention vs geomean-
speedup plane.
Two observations stand out. First, SAT retention and speedup are in fundamental tension:
tighter constraints prune the search space more aggressively and deliver higher per-instance speedup
where they apply, but render more instances unsatisfiable. This tradeoff is visible in all three panels
as a downward-sloping Pareto frontier from top-left (high speedup, low retention) to bottom-right
(lower speedup, broad coverage). A useful streamliner portfolio needs both: a high-speedup/low-
retention member to win on the instances it retains, and a conservative member to cover the
rest.
Second, the two LLM paths occupy different regions of the tradeoff space. On Black Hole
the discovery path dominates the high-speedup end (the pile-top family), while on hardened SG
the stats path owns the top-left. On VL both paths are competitive throughout. The two paths
address different aspects of the solution-set signal: the llm stats path is strongest when structural
regularity is captured by the per-property library, while llm discovery is strongest when the
regularity involves variables outside that library (the BH pile-top coordinates, the VL grid-alignment
pattern). Templates appear in the BH pool but contribute nothing above 1 × on the hardened
regime and are omitted from the figure.
21

Figure 7: SAT retention (% of test instances solved) vs geomean speedup on retained instances
(log scale) for all validated streamliners across the three problems. Blue circles = llm stats path;
orange squares = llm discovery path. No template candidates appear above 1 × speedup on the
hardened evaluation regime. The dashed line marks 1×(no improvement).
6.2 Selection inefficiency and the role of the pool
As Table 2 shows, hardened SG/VL exhibit small selection gaps ( ≤ 5 pp) while Black Hole exhibits a
15.2-percentage-point gap. We can decompose the gap further by examining the candidate constraint
familiespresent in each pool.
On hardened SG and VL, the deployed picks span complementary constraint families, each
targeting a distinct structural regularity. The 4-way race in the portfolio rarely sees two streamliners
competing on the same instance, and the static rule recovers most of the pool ceiling.
On Black Hole, by contrast, the simple top-3 picks are all from the samefamily: pile-top y-
coordinate bounds at three aggressiveness levels. When this family is the per-instance optimum the
portfolio captures it, but for instances where the optimum lies in a different family the portfolio falls
back to baseline. This is the structural origin of BH’s 15 .2 pp selection gap, which the family-budget
allocation (Section 4.5) is designed to address. As Table 2 reports, family-budget recovers 9 .7 of the
15.2 pp gap, leaving a 5.5 pp residual. This instance-level variability is directly visible in Figure 4:
the BH panel shows a highly fragmented pattern where no single streamliner dominates across the
full instance set, in contrast to the more consistent coverage visible in the SG and VL panels.
6.3 Sensitivity of family-budget tokandm, and wall-clock vs. CPU cost
The family-budget mechanism (Section 4.5) has two parameters: the number of families k deployed
and the number of members m retained per family. Throughout the evaluation we fix k = 3 for
direct comparability with prior portfolio work, but here we sweep both dimensions and additionally
report CPU-adjusted savings alongside wall-clock savings to characterise the compute cost of the
parallel race.
Intra-family count m.Table 4 reports wall-clock portfolio savings at k = 3 for m∈ { 1, 2, 3}
and for “all members” (no intra-family cap). Three observations. First, the diminishing-returns
prediction is borne out empirically: m = 3 captures essentially all of the recoverable gain on each
22

Table 4: Sensitivity to intra-family member count m at k = 3 families (wall-clock savings). Best m
per problem in bold; “all members” = no cap on intra-family size. All values simulated from the
shared validation-pool data used for the Section 5 headlines.
m= 1m= 2m= 3 all members
Hardened SG 95.3% 95.2% 98.6%98.7%
Hardened VL 97.6% 98.8% 98.8%95.3%
Black Hole 79.2% 89.4% 89.4%83.9%
problem, and the marginal gain from m = 2 to m = 3 is already smaller than from m = 1 to m = 2
on Black Hole. Second, growing m beyond three members per familydegradesperformance on
Vessel Loading: VL’s vl_no_rotation family has eight variants whose later members are weak, and
including them all causes slot dilution that prevents the strong members from completing within
their shrunken slot. This corroborates the mechanism’s design hypothesis: the value of intra-family
diversity saturates early, and exceeding the saturation point hurts. Third, m = 1 reduces the
family-budget portfolio to one member-per-family (effectively a family-balanced top- k ranking with
full per-streamliner time) and recovers only a small fraction of the family-budget gain on SG and VL
(0.9 pp and 0.2 pp over simple top-3 respectively), and is slightlyworsethan simple top-3 on Black
Hole (−0.5 pp) because the single best pile-top member per family cannot replicate the slot-sharing
benefit. The family-awareallocation(slot-shared compute across multiple members) does the bulk
of the work; family-awareselectionalone is insufficient.
Wall-clock vs. CPU-adjusted savings.For Hardened SG and Hardened VL the CPU-adjusted
figures track wall-clock savings closely across all ( k, m) settings (within 4 pp), because the winning
streamliners solve their instances so quickly that ( k + 1) ×t winner remains a small fraction of tb. At
the paper’s default ( k = 3, m = 3): SG 94 .5% CPU-adjusted (vs. 98 .6% wall-clock); VL 95 .1% (vs.
98.8%).
Black Hole shows a larger gap (89 .4% wall-clock, 57.7% CPU-adjusted at k = 3, m = 3) because
BH streamliner SAT coverage is lower: a non-trivial fraction of instances are solved only by the
baseline, so the parallel processes that fail on those instances consume their full slot budget without
contributing. The wasted compute accumulates in the CPU accounting but is invisible in the
wall-clock figure, which records only the winner’s time.
Table 5 shows the full ( k, m) sweep for Black Hole, reporting both wall-clock savings (WC) and
CPU-adjusted savings (CPU). Increasing k improves wall-clock monotonically (more diverse families
cover more instances) butdegradesCPU-adjusted savings at fixed m = 1, because each additional
family adds another parallel process that frequently exhausts its slot without finding SAT. The
most CPU-efficient settings are low- k, moderate- m: ( k = 2, m = 2) delivers 88 .8% wall-clock at
66.4% CPU-adjusted, the best CPU figure in the table. The paper’s default ( k = 3, m = 3) trades
8.7 pp of CPU efficiency for 0 .6 pp of additional wall-clock savings over ( k = 2, m = 2), a reasonable
exchange when spare cores are available. Practitioners under strict compute budgets may prefer the
(k= 2, m= 2) configuration.
7 Limitations and Threats to Validity
Breadth of direct comparison.We report a direct head-to-head against StreamLLM [ 25] only
on Black Hole, the one problem where standard hardening is not applicable and the two pipelines
23

Table 5: Black Hole portfolio savings across family count k and per-family member count m. Each
cell shows wall-clock savings (WC) / CPU-adjusted savings (CPU). Paper default ( k = 3, m = 3)
marked†; oracle pool ceiling is 94.9% wall-clock.
m= 1m= 2m= 3
k= 1 54.7% / 9.4% 77.8% / 55.6% 78.0% / 56.0%
k= 2 75.2% / 25.6% 88.8% / 66.4% 88.8% / 66.5%
k= 3 79.2% / 16.9% 89.4% / 57.7% 89.4% / 57.7% †
k= 4 81.6% / 8.2% 90.0% / 49.8% 90.0% / 49.9%
k= 5 85.0% / 10.2% 90.0% / 40.1% 90.0% / 40.2%
therefore face the same task. For Social Golfers and Vessel Loading we evaluate onhardenedvariants
of the StreamLLM-distributed models, which is a different evaluation regime; a reader cannot
directly compare our hardened SG and VL numbers against StreamLLM’s reported figures because
the underlying baselines differ. We have not re-run the StreamLLM pipeline against our hardened
models. A hardened-baseline rerun of StreamLLM, while methodologically clean, is computationally
expensive and beyond the scope of this paper; we leave it to future work.
LLM dependence.Constraint synthesis uses Claude Opus as the prompted LLM throughout. We
did experiment with self-hosted open-weight models via Ollama (specifically the qwen2.5-coder:14b
class of models, the largest size our available hardware could run), but the generated MiniZinc was
not syntactically reliable enough to sustain the constraint-synthesis pass, and we were unable to host
larger models that might have done better. An open-weight reproduction with sufficiently capable
hardware is therefore left to future work; it is desirable both for cost reasons (the headline pools are
independent of solver runs) and for reproducibility under proprietary-model discontinuation. We
report the LLM client and version in each experiment’sexperiment config.json.
Run-to-run variance and reproducibility.Single-seed pipeline runs have non-trivial variance
because both the CNN training and the LLM constraint synthesis are non-deterministic. We
mitigate the CNN side with an ensemble of K = 3 random seeds per training instance; the LLM
side is mitigated by the semantic-clustering pass that absorbs parametrically-equivalent variants
into representative clusters. Headline numbers in this paper come from a single end-to-end pipeline
run per problem; we have not run multiple end-to-end seeds and report variance bands. This is a
real limitation: a reviewer cannot infer from our numbers how sensitive the deployed top-3 picks are
to the seed used for constraint synthesis.
CNN ablation and architecture.The meaningful published alternative to CNN-grounded
synthesis is LLM-only generation from the model text (StreamLLM), which we compare against
directly on Black Hole (Section 5.3). The mechanical template path is the other natural reference
and is already in the pipeline; it contributes no headline picks (Figure 7). The BH pile-top
constraint is unreachable by any fixed-property-library approach (Section 5.3), establishing the
CNN’s contribution by construction on that problem. The one open question is whether the CNN
correlation ranking on the llm stats path adds value over simply presenting all properties unranked;
we leave this to future work. A related question is network depth: in practice the most interpretable
signal was consistently in the first layer, and whether the 3-layer architecture is necessary over a
single convolutional layer has not been tested.
24

Variance check.The pipeline implicitly assumes that the property library contains at least
one property with non-zero per-solution variance and bounded range; without such a property no
streamliner candidate can be generated by the llm stats path. Problems whose feasible solutions
share all aggregate properties (e.g., Steiner Triple Systems, where every feasible solution has identical
row sums, column sums, and pair counts) will yield no useful candidates from the statistics path,
though the discovery path may still identify structure from the filter-contrast pairs. We have not
evaluated such problems in this paper.
8 Conclusion
We have presented a pipeline for streamliner synthesis driven by CNN pattern recognition on
enumerated solutions. The central idea is to use the CNN as a grounding mechanism: rather
than asking the LLM to reason from model text alone (as in StreamLLM) or from raw solution
arrays (impractical at scale), the CNN first identifies which structural properties of the solution
distribution are most discriminative, and then directs the LLM’s attention to that observed evidence.
The result is constraint synthesis that is both unconstrained in shape (the LLM can propose any
MiniZinc expression) and anchored in structure that actually holds in the feasible solution set
rather than inferred from problem description alone. Per training instance, a Convolutional Neural
Network is trained contrastively to detect structural patterns the feasibility predicate exploits, and
its discriminative signal is surfaced to a Large Language Model along two paths: filter–property
correlation rankings alongside per-property statistics, and direct filter-contrast on high-activation and
low-activation solution pairs. The LLM translates the resulting structural evidence into candidate
MiniZinc streamliners, which are pooled, clustered, and validated against cached baselines.
We evaluated the pipeline in the regime where automated streamliner discovery is genuinely
needed: hardened benchmark models with literature-standard symmetry-breaking and implied
constraints already in place, plus Black Hole, the one benchmark in our suite without a canonical
hardening. Deployed at k = 3 families with m = 3 members per family, the family-budget portfolio
delivers 98.8% time reduction on hardened Vessel Loading with a best-single-streamliner geometric-
mean speedup of 932 ×; 98.6% on hardened Social Golfers with a 356 × best-single geomean; and
89.4% on Black Hole with a 1103 × best-single geomean. On Black Hole, where direct head-to-head
comparison with prior work is methodologically clean, the 89 .4% family-budget result exceeds
StreamLLM’s realtime configuration ( ≈80%); the simple-top-3 reading (79 .7%) matches that prior
work for like-for-like comparison, and family-budget closes 9 .7 of the 15 .2-percentage-point pool
ceiling gap with no additional compute envelope.
Across all three problems, both LLM paths contribute headline picks; the CNN’s filter-contrast
path is load-bearing on Black Hole specifically, where it surfaces constraints over layout coordinates
that the per-property statistics path does not reach. The discovered streamliners are structurally
distinct from what the standard hardening provides: class-based packing constraints on Vessel
Loading, beyond-hardening canonicalisations on Social Golfers, and layout-coordinate bounds on
Black Hole.
A secondary observation is that the CNN’s activation maps carry diagnostic information about
which kind of constraint the discovery path produces. On Vessel Loading and Black Hole the
activations expose interpretable spatial structure (deck silhouette and per-pile invariants respectively)
and the discovery picks key directly on that structure; the Black Hole pile-top constraint is
structurally unreachable by any fixed-property-library approach, providing direct evidence of the
CNN’s contribution on that problem. On Social Golfers the activations are flat and the discovery
path falls back on prior-driven canonicalisations.
25

The most natural direction for future work is richer CNN training: the current binary contrastive
objective converges on the single most discriminative pattern per instance, and harder negatives or
multi-property auxiliary tasks would encourage filter specialisation across independent structural
signals. A second direction is prompt refinement: although the LLM already receives the full
MiniZinc model alongside the CNN evidence, it does not always reason carefully about consistency
with existing model constraints when proposing bounds. Explicitly instructing the LLM to verify
that a proposed constraint does not conflict with or duplicate constraints already in the model would
improve the precision of generated candidates and reduce candidates that are trivially implied or
structurally inconsistent. A third direction is finer family tagging for the portfolio (constraint-AST
clustering or behavioural similarity rather than descriptor prefix) to recover the residual gap to the
full-pool oracle. A broader open-weight LLM reproduction would also strengthen reproducibility.
A Hardening constraints
Social Golfers
We add three literature-standard constraints [7] to the StreamLLM-distributed Social Golfers model:
• Week-1 canonical partition.Fix the entire first-week column to a canonical assignment,
breaking golfer-permutation symmetry within week 1:
forall(g in Golfer)(assign[g, 1] = ((g-1) div n_per_group) + 1)
• Golfer-1 group anchor.Fix golfer 1 to group 1 in every week beyond the first, naming “group 1”
as the group containing golfer 1:
forall(w in Week where w > 1)(assign[1, w] = 1)
• Inter-week lex ordering.Impose lex order on weeks 2. . . nrounds [9], breaking week-permutation
symmetry (week 1 is excluded as its column is already canonicalised).
Vessel Loading
We add two constraints [7] to the StreamLLM-distributed Vessel Loading model:
• Lex-leader symmetry break over identical containers.Containers sharing width, length, and
class are interchangeable; their (Left,Bottom) pairs are forced into lex order:
forall(c1, c2 in Containers
where c1 < c2 /\ width[c1]=width[c2]
/\ length[c1]=length[c2]
/\ class[c1]=class[c2])
(lex_lesseq([Left[c1], Bottom[c1]],
[Left[c2], Bottom[c2]]))
• Square-container orientation canonicalisation.Containers with width = length have their
rotation flag fixed, eliminating the trivial rotation symmetry that would otherwise double-count
square placements:
forall(c in Containers where width[c]=length[c])
(not rotated[c])
26

References
[1] ¨Ozg¨ ur Akg¨ un, Alan M. Frisch, Ian P. Gent, Christopher Jefferson, Ian Miguel, and Peter
Nightingale. Conjure: Automatic generation of constraint models from problem specifications.
Artificial Intelligence, 310:103751, 2022.
[2] David Bau, Bolei Zhou, Aditya Khosla, Aude Oliva, and Antonio Torralba. Network dissection:
Quantifying interpretability of deep visual representations. InConference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2017.
[3] Nicolas Beldiceanu and Helmut Simonis. A model seeker: Extracting global constraint models
from positive examples. InPrinciples and Practice of Constraint Programming (CP), 2012.
[4] Christian Bessiere, R´ emi Coletta, Emmanuel Hebrard, George Katsirelos, Nadjib Lazaar,
Nina Narodytska, Claude-Guy Quimper, and Toby Walsh. Constraint acquisition.Artificial
Intelligence, 244:315–342, 2017.
[5] John Charnley, Simon Colton, and Ian Miguel. Automatic generation of implied constraints.
InEuropean Conference on Artificial Intelligence (ECAI), 2006.
[6] Geoffrey Chu. Chuffed: A lazy clause generation solver. 2018. https://github.com/chuffed/
chuffed.
[7] James Crawford, Matthew Ginsberg, Eugene Luks, and Amitabha Roy. Symmetry-breaking
predicates for search problems. InKnowledge Representation and Reasoning (KR), 1996.
[8] Nguyen Dang, ¨Ozg¨ ur Akg¨ un, Joan Espasa, Ian Miguel, and Peter Nightingale. A framework
for generating informative benchmark instances. InPrinciples and Practice of Constraint
Programming (CP), volume 235, pages 18:1–18:18, 2022.
[9] Pierre Flener, Alan M. Frisch, Brahim Hnich, Zeynep Kiziltan, Ian Miguel, Justin Pearson,
and Toby Walsh. Breaking row and column symmetries in matrix models. InPrinciples and
Practice of Constraint Programming (CP), pages 462–477, 2002.
[10] Alan M. Frisch, Warwick Harvey, Christopher Jefferson, Bernadette Mart´ ınez Hern´ andez, and
Ian Miguel. Essence: A constraint language for specifying combinatorial problems.Constraints,
13(3):268–306, 2008.
[11] Ian P. Gent, Christopher Jefferson, Tom Kelsey, Inˆ es Lynce, Ian Miguel, Peter Nightingale,
Barbara M. Smith, and S. Armagan Tarim. Search in the patience game ‘Black Hole’. InAI
Communications, volume 20, pages 211–226, 2007.
[12] Ian P. Gent and Toby Walsh. CSPLib: A benchmark library for constraints. https://www.
csplib.org/, 1999. Online benchmark library; problem 010 (Social Golfers), 008 (Vessel
Loading), 023 (Black Hole patience).
[13] Carla P. Gomes and Meinolf Sellmann. Streamlined constraint reasoning. InPrinciples and
Practice of Constraint Programming (CP), 2004.
[14] Ronan Le Bras, Carla P. Gomes, and Bart Selman. From streamlined combinatorial search to
efficient constructive procedures. InAAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2012.
27

[15] Nicholas Nethercote, Peter J. Stuckey, Ralph Becket, Sebastian Brand, Gregory J. Duck, and
Guido Tack. MiniZinc: Towards a standard CP modelling language. InPrinciples and Practice
of Constraint Programming (CP), 2007.
[16] Kexin Pei, David Bieber, Kensen Shi, Charles Sutton, and Pengcheng Yin. Can large language
models reason about program invariants? InInternational Conference on Machine Learning
(ICML), 2023.
[17] Bernardino Romera-Paredes, Mohammadamin Barekatain, Alexander Novikov, Matej Balog,
M. Pawan Kumar, Emilien Dupont, Francisco J. R. Ruiz, Jordan S. Ellenberg, Pengming Wang,
Omar Fawzi, Pushmeet Kohli, and Alhussein Fawzi. Mathematical discoveries from program
search with large language models.Nature, 625:468–475, 2024.
[18] Francesca Rossi, Peter van Beek, and Toby Walsh, editors.Handbook of Constraint Programming.
Foundations of Artificial Intelligence. Elsevier, 2006.
[19] Olivier Roussel. Controlling a solver execution: the runsolver tool.Journal on Satisfiability,
Boolean Modeling and Computation, 7(4):139–144, 2011.
[20] Daniel Selsam, Matthew Lamm, Benedikt B¨ unz, Percy Liang, Leonardo de Moura, and David L.
Dill. Learning a SAT solver from single-bit supervision.International Conference on Learning
Representations (ICLR), 2019.
[21] Casey Smith, Carla P. Gomes, and C` esar Fern´ andez. Streamlining local search for spatially
balanced Latin squares. InInternational Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI),
2005.
[22] Patrick Spracklen, ¨Ozg¨ ur Akg¨ un, and Ian Miguel. Monte carlo tree search on a model lattice:
Automatic streamliner generation. InPrinciples and Practice of Constraint Programming (CP),
2018.
[23] Patrick Spracklen, Nguyen Dang, ¨Ozg¨ ur Akg¨ un, and Ian Miguel. Automatic streamlining for
constrained optimisation. InPrinciples and Practice of Constraint Programming (CP), 2019.
[24] Patrick Spracklen, Nguyen Dang, ¨Ozg¨ ur Akg¨ un, and Ian Miguel. Automated streamliner port-
folios for constraint satisfaction problems.Artificial Intelligence, 319:103915, 2023. Benchmark
instances and code:https://github.com/stacs-cp/automated-streamliner-portfolios.
[25] Florentina Voboril, Vaidyanathan Peruvemba Ramaswamy, and Stefan Szeider. Generating
streamlining constraints with large language models.Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research,
84:16:1–16:19, 2025. Code and instances:https://zenodo.org/records/14757597.
[26] Po-Wei Wang, Priya Donti, Bryan Wilder, and J. Zico Kolter. SATNet: Bridging deep learning
and logical reasoning using a differentiable satisfiability solver. InInternational Conference on
Machine Learning (ICML), 2019.
[27] James Wetter, ¨Ozg¨ ur Akg¨ un, and Ian Miguel. Automatically generating streamlined constraint
models with Essence and Conjure. InPrinciples and Practice of Constraint Programming (CP),
2015.
[28] Haoze Wu, Clark Barrett, and Nina Narodytska. Lemur: Integrating large language models
in automated program verification. InInternational Conference on Learning Representations
(ICLR), 2024.
28
