Agentic Discovery of Cryomicroneedle Formulations
Hao Li, Lifu Du, Nurul Hameed, Shemonti Saha Authai,
Zlata Stefanovic, Chenjie Xu
Department of Biomedical Engineering, City University of Hong Kong
83 Tat Chee Avenue, Kowloon, Hong Kong SAR, China
Abstract
Cryomicroneedles offer a route to minimally invasive intradermal delivery of living cells,
but their cryogenic formulations must reconcile cell protection with constraints on toxic-
ity and device fabrication. Here we report an AI-assisted, closed-loop workflow for cry-
omicroneedle cryoprotectant discovery that combines literature curation, Gaussian-process
surrogate modelling, Bayesian optimization, and sequential wet-lab validation. A curated
dataset of 198 mesenchymal stem-cell cryopreservation formulations from 42 studies was con-
verted into 21 ingredient features and used to train an uncertainty-aware literature prior.
This model captured moderate structure in the literature data but failed prospectively, moti-
vating iterative wet-lab correction. Across ten validation iterations and 106 wet-lab observa-
tions, the model progressively adapted to cryomicroneedle-specific outcomes: batch RMSE
decreased from 41.21 to 6.86 percentage points, later-stage rank correlations became con-
sistently positive, and the cumulative wet-lab predicted-versus-measured summary reached
R2 = 0.942. The best validated formulation achieved 95.15% post-thaw viability with low
DMSO, ectoin, ethylene glycol, and fetal bovine serum. However, high viability alone did not
ensure intact cryomicroneedle formation, highlighting the need for future multi-objective op-
timization. These results demonstrate that agent-assisted computational infrastructure can
make data-efficient formulation discovery more accessible to labs with minimal data expertise
in-house. Project code is available athttps://github.com/baitmeister/ML-for-CryoMN.
Keywords:cryomicroneedle, cryopreservation medium, machine learning, artificial intelli-
gence, mesenchymal stem cells
1 Introduction
Cryomicroneedle is an emerging platform for the intradermal delivery of living cells. In this
approach, a cryogenic formulation containing living cells is molded into microneedle templates
and frozen, embedding viable cells directly within the needle tips. These frozen microneedle
patches can either be prepared in advance and shipped at low temperature to the end-user to
be later applied with minimal preparation or be directly fabricated by the end-user on the spot.
Thus, cryomicroneedle combines the minimally invasive advantages of microneedle delivery with
the logistical benefits of living cell cryopreservation.[1, 2, 3]
A defining challenge in cryomicroneedle technology is the design of the cryogenic formula-
tion. Unlike conventional cryopreservation media, which are optimized primarily to preserve
1
arXiv:2605.19677v1  [cs.LG]  19 May 2026

cells during freezing and thawing, cryomicroneedle formulations must provide not only effective
cryoprotection to maintain cell viability but also a mechanically stable structure capable of pen-
etrating skin and dissolving rapidly after insertion. The combined biological and mechanical
constraints increase the complexity of formulation design and create a large and heterogeneous
formulation design space. Numerous candidate ingredients have been reported in the cryobiol-
ogy literature, including permeating cryoprotectants such as dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) and
ethylene glycol; membrane-stabilizing sugars like sucrose; osmoprotective solutes such as ec-
toine; and complex additives like serum. However, the performance of a formulation depends
on nonlinear interactions among multiple components. Using exhaustive experiments to ex-
plore this combinatorial space is impractical, and intuition-driven approaches tend to prioritize
familiar formulations that may overlook uncertain yet promising regions of the design space.
As a result, identifying effective formulations for cryomicroneedle becomes difficult through
conventional experimental design.[4, 5]
Machine learning offers promising strategies for navigating such complex formulation spaces
by guiding the experimental exploration more efficiently. Instead of relying on exhaustive screen-
ing or empirically guided design, data-driven predictive models can learn relationships between
formulation composition and experimental outcomes, allowing researchers to prioritize experi-
ments that most likely improve performance or reveal new information.[6, 7, 8] However, imple-
menting such data-driven approaches in practice presents a substantial barrier. Constructing a
usable computational pipeline typically requires integrating literature data extraction, dataset
curation, model training, uncertainty-aware experiment selection, iterative experimental updat-
ing, and analysis tools. Many experimental laboratories recognize the potential value of machine
learning for experimental optimization but lack the computational expertise or engineering time
needed to build and maintain this infrastructure. Thankfully, recent democratization of artificial
intelligence (AI) suggests a possible solution to this barrier. AI agents are increasingly capable
of interacting with software tools, generating code, and coordinating multi-step computational
workflows under human supervision. Without replacing human researchers in scientific rea-
soning and higher-level decision-making, such systems function as programmable collaborators
that provide additional guidance and help researchers construct the computational infrastruc-
ture required for modern data-driven discovery.[9, 10, 11]
Here we present a proof-of-concept study demonstrating how an AI-assisted computational
workflow can support the discovery of cryomicroneedle formulations (Fig. 1). We develop an
iterative machine-learning framework that integrates literature-derived data, probabilistic sur-
rogate modeling, Bayesian optimization, and sequential wet-lab validation. Much of the sup-
porting computational infrastructure is implemented through AI-assisted coding under human
oversight, thereby significantly lowering the practical barrier to deploying such methods in
experimental laboratories. Using this framework, we demonstrate the discovery of cryomi-
croneedle cryoprotectant formulations that reduce reliance on DMSO while maintaining high
post-thaw cell viability. Other important attributes, including microneedle mechanical perfor-
mance, remain crucial but are reserved for future multi-objective studies. Therefore, the aim of
the present work is not to claim a final optimal cryomicroneedle formulation, but to illustrate
how AI-assisted workflow construction can enable data-efficient experimental optimization in
research environments where specialized computational expertise is limited.
2

Fig. 1 —Schematic of the AI-assisted cryoprotectant formulation discovery workflow. Literature-
derived formulation data are parsed into structured features, used to train Gaussian-process models, and
iteratively updated with wet-lab validation results before new formulation batches are suggested.
2 Methods
2.1 AI-assisted workflow construction
The computational pipeline was developed using AI-assisted coding under direct human super-
vision. In the initial one-shot prompt (Supplementary Methods), the scientific task was defined
as a low-data formulation-optimization problem with four constraints: to maximize post-thaw
viability, to minimize DMSO usage, to restrict candidate formulations to no more than 10 active
ingredients, and to enable iterative updating after each wet-lab round. The agent, powered by
Claude Opus 4.5 in Antigravity, proposed the plan to implement the overall workflow structure,
including data parsing, surrogate modeling, optimization methods, candidate generation, model
updating, and evaluation. After human revision of said plan, the agent proceeded to generate
code, repository structure, and documentation. The generated materials from this one-shot
prompt were reviewed and executed by the authors using Codex on GPT-5.3-codex. Additional
features in the final program that did not appear in the initial repository, including evaluation
and explainability, stage-indexed coefficient-of-determinationR 2 plots, and next-batch formu-
lation design, were prompted by the authors, coded, and implemented using Claude Opus 4.5
in Antigravity and GPT-5.3-codex in Codex.
3

2.2 Literature dataset preparation
The initial dataset was assembled from 75 primary research articles reporting a total of 499
cryoprotective formulations and viability outcomes (Supplementary Methods; Supplementary
Data). We focused on the cryopreservation of mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) because it is
one of the model cell types in cryopreservation research. The literature review was done man-
ually using keywords related to MSCs, including naming variants such as mesenchymal stro-
mal cells and source-specific variants such as umbilical cord-derived MSCs or adipose-derived
stem/stromal cells (ASCs), together with viability. Reported cryoprotective formulations and
immediate post-thaw viability values were manually extracted as free text. Types of viability
assays and cooling protocols were not modeled separately in the present proof-of-concept study.
Such free-text formulation and viability descriptions were then parsed into a structured matrix
in which each canonical ingredient occupied one feature column and each row represented one
unique formulation. Synonymous ingredient names were merged into shared canonical identities,
whereas basal media and buffer systems were excluded as formulation variables. Concentrations
were harmonized into a mixed unit representation: ingredients with defined molecular proper-
ties were converted to molar units, whereas complex mixtures and polymers that could not be
meaningfully represented in molar form were retained as percentages. Molecular-weight-specific
polyethylene glycol species were tracked separately because their cryoprotective behavior may
differ across size classes. Any duplicate formulation with discordant reported viabilities, largely
due to different cooling methods, was collapsed by averaging the viability values because cooling
methods are out of scope. Any relative viability (i.e., Formulation B has anx% viability when
normalized to Formulation A’s viability) that might result in viability values greater than 100%
was excluded from model training. To reduce feature space and instability from very sparse
variables, ingredients that appeared in fewer than 3 formulations were deleted. The whole data-
cleaning process yielded the final 198 unique literature formulations described by 21 canonical
ingredient features.
2.3 Gaussian-process surrogate model
Formulation performance was modeled using Gaussian-process regression. This approach was
chosen because it is suitable for sparse experimental datasets and provides both a predicted
mean and a predictive uncertainty for each candidate formulation. The initial literature-only
surrogate used a Mat´ ern kernel and standardized ingredient features before fitting. Initial model
performance was estimated using five-fold cross-validation, in which the literature dataset was
split into five subsets and each subset was predicted once by a model trained on the remaining
four subsets.
2.4 Candidate generation
The trained Gaussian-process surrogate was used to propose candidate cryoprotective formu-
lations for wet-lab testing. In the first five iterations, candidates were generated by random
sampling of the feasible formulation space and then ranked by the Gaussian-process predicted
mean viability. This strategy provided broad initial exploration when little cryomicroneedle-
specific wet-lab feedback was available, allowing the model to learn the assay-specific landscape
4

before being trusted to optimize it. In later iterations, candidate generation was replaced by
Bayesian optimization. In this setting, the same Gaussian-process model served as the surrogate
model, and an upper-confidence-bound (UCB) acquisition function detailed in Equation 1 was
used to combine predicted viability and uncertainty into a single search objective. In Equa-
tion 1,xdenotes a candidate formulation vector in feature space,µ(x) is the model-predicted
mean viability for that candidate,σ(x) is the model-predicted standard deviation for that
candidate, andκis the exploration weight controlling how strongly uncertainty is rewarded
relative to predicted mean performance, which we set toκ= 0.5. The UCB score was com-
puted in post-thaw viability percentage-point units. Model predictions were obtained as the
sum of the literature-derived prior mean and the wet-lab residual-correction model, followed by
the stage-specific additive mean correction and multiplicative uncertainty correction stored in
the model metadata. Thus, bothµ(x) andσ(x) in Equation 1 are reported on the calibrated
viability-percent scale.
aUCB (x) =µ(x) +κ·σ(x) (1)
Then, differential evolution was used as the numerical optimizer to search for formulations
with high acquisition scores under formulation constraints. Candidate formulations were re-
quired to satisfy practical constraints, including a maximum of 10 active ingredients and an
upper DMSO bound. We set up two different DMSO upper limits, thus generating two dif-
ferent pools of candidate files: ”general” at 5% DMSO and ”DMSO-free” at 0.5% DMSO.
More detailed reasoning on optimization methods, search bounds, acquisition parameters, and
batch-selection rules are provided in Supplementary Methods.
After the formulation candidates were generated, the final wet-lab slate was selected by a
separate formulation recommendation step. In the first five iterations, where random search was
used, the selection was done manually by picking candidates with high predicted viability yet
not overly similar to other formulations. In later iterations, this step involved combining high-
performing exploitation candidates with exploration candidates designed to expose model blind
spots. Exploitation candidates were selected from the highest-ranked Bayesian-optimization
outputs after removing already tested formulations, whereas exploration candidates were gen-
erated from residual patterns observed in previous wet-lab stages. Formulations that had per-
formed better than predicted were used as local anchors, and historically underpredicted regions
of formulation space were used to define blind-spot probes. Additional coverage probes were
included to expand support in sparse regions of the observed formulation space. In this way,
the formulation recommendation step translated model predictions and model failures into a
balanced set of wet-lab validation candidates, intended to both identify strong formulations and
improve future model performance.
2.5 Wet-lab validation
Selected formulations per recommendation were prepared. Umbilical cord-derived human mes-
enchymal stem cells at either the 7th or 8th passage were used to conduct the viability validation.
These cells were cultured in low-glucose Dulbecco’s modified Eagle medium (DMEM) with Glu-
taMAX and pyruvate (Gibco, Cat. 10567014) until 80% confluence before being trypsinized for
5

viability assay. Polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) negative molds used to fabricate cryomicronee-
dles were affixed inside the wells in 6-well plates. Detailed specifications of the PDMS mold and
the resulting cryomicroneedles can be found in Supplementary Methods. A 700µL aliquot of
the cell suspension solution prepared using the selected formulation at around 1×10 6 cells/mL
was added to PDMS negative molds, and the plates containing the molds were then centrifuged
once for 3 minutes at 400g. Afterwards, no air bubbles or hollow cavities near the needle
channels were visible. Excess liquid outside of the needle tips was wicked away with tissue
paper. Needle tips were clearly filled with cell-containing candidate cryoprotectants. Another
700µL of the respective cell-containing cryoprotectant solution was added to each mold. The
6-well plates containing molds were transferred to a 4 ◦C refrigerator for 30 minutes, then to a
-20◦C freezer for 2.5 hours, before being transferred to a -80 ◦C freezer for another 2.5 hours.
Afterwards, these cryomicroneedle-containing plates were directly transferred to a 37◦C floating
water bath within 15 seconds, where the cryomicroneedles were thawed inside the wells of the
6-well plates. Thawed solutions were transferred to centrifuge tubes for centrifugation at 400g
for 4 minutes. The supernatant was then removed, and the cells were resuspended with 2 mL
staining cocktail in a 12-well plate. This cocktail was prepared to have 1µM CellTracker Green
CMFDA and 1 drop of NucBlue Live ReadyProbes reagent containing Hoechst 33342 per mL
in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS). Immediately after, the 12-well plates were transferred to
the incubator (37 ◦C, 5% CO 2, 95% relative humidity) for 45 minutes for staining. Afterwards,
18µL of thawed cryomicroneedle solution was sampled from each well into a Countess Cell
Counting Chamber Slide for viability assay. Post-thaw viability was defined as the number
of CMFDA-positive (alive) cells divided by the number of Hoechst-positive (all) cells in the
Countess image field. For each formulation, five image replicates were analyzed using ImageJ,
and the average was used as the viability for that formulation.
2.6 Feedback and model update
Measured post-thaw viability values were incorporated into the next model update. The
literature-only model generated the first validation batch, which is referred to as stage 0 or
iteration 0. After this stage, the model was updated using a prior-mean correction strategy:
the literature-trained Gaussian process was retained as the baseline predictor, and a second
Gaussian process was fitted to the residuals between measured wet-lab viability and literature-
model prediction. The final prediction was the sum of the literature-derived prediction and the
wet-lab residual correction. After the model update, iteration 1 began. Later iterations fol-
lowed the same closed-loop structure: update the surrogate, generate candidates, test selected
formulations, and update the model again using wet-lab results.
This update strategy allowed the model to preserve broad formulation trends learned from
the literature while adapting to cryomicroneedle-specific wet-lab outcomes. Wet-lab observa-
tions were given a default 50-fold greater local influence than literature data through source-
specific noise assumptions. Wet-lab generalization was estimated by cross-validating with only
the wet-lab rows while retaining all literature rows in the training set for every fold, and the
residual diagnostics from this process were then converted into two post-hoc calibration terms
applied downstream to all reported predictions: an additive mean correction and a multiplica-
tive uncertainty correction. Details of the implementation, other parameters, and the cross-
validation protocol can be found in Supplementary Methods.
6

2.7 Evaluation and explainability
After the wet-lab viability feedback, model evaluation was performed at the stage level us-
ing frozen checkpoints. Each saved model was evaluated against the wet-lab batch that had
been selected from that stage, preserving the historical decision context. For example, the
literature-only model was evaluated against the first wet-lab batch chosen from the literature-
only candidate files (stage 0), whereas the frozen iteration 3 model was evaluated against the
wet-lab formulations that were selected from the iteration 3 candidate outputs, not against
formulations proposed later by iteration 4 or iteration 5 models. This prevents later model
revisions from rewriting the evidence for earlier decisions and ensures that each stage is judged
on the prospective experiment set it truly generated.
For each stage batch, we reported various metrics, including root mean squared error
(RMSE), mean absolute error (MAE), ranking accuracy, and Spearman’s and Kendall’s rank
correlation coefficients for that specific batch. Moreover, we reported the coefficient of determi-
nation using a prospective-cumulativeR 2 protocol. At each stagek, predictions from the frozen
stage model were evaluated against the cumulative wet-lab set available up to stagek. This
design preserves temporal ordering while increasing effective sample size and outcome-range
coverage, which makes the explained-variance estimate more stable and interpretable across
iterations. We did not treat batch-specificR 2 as a primary endpoint because individual wet-lab
batches were small, often with only a few formulations validated, andR 2 is highly sensitive to
both outliers and within-batch response variance under those conditions. As a result, batch
R2 could fluctuate sharply, including sign reversals, without reflecting a meaningful change in
practical predictive utility. In this setting, reporting only batchR 2 would therefore be noisy
and potentially redundant relative to the broader prospective-cumulative trend.
To make the model’s decisions and reasoning more interpretable, an explainability module
was used to assess the active iteration-specific observed context. Graphs that showed feature
importance, Shapley additive explanations (SHAP) summaries, support-aware marginal effects,
pairwise interaction contours, acquisition landscapes, and uncertainty diagnostics were gener-
ated to identify dominant formulation variables, visualize where the model was interpolating
versus extrapolating, and assess whether predictive uncertainty remained useful for experimen-
tal decision-making. Detailed definitions of the evaluation metrics, prospective-cumulativeR 2
implementation, and explainability plots are provided in Supplementary Methods.
3 Results
The complete agent-assisted workflow connecting literature curation, model training, candidate
generation, wet-lab validation, and batch recommendation is summarized in Fig. 1.
3.1 Initial baseline architecture
The one-shot prompt generated a baseline that was immediately organized as a modular closed-
loop pipeline rather than as an isolated analysis notebook. The prompt defined the problem
as a low-data cryoprotectant optimization, constrained candidate recipes to no more than 10
7

active ingredients, asked for DMSO minimization and viability maximization, and required the
model to evolve after wet-lab validation. In response, the first substantive repository commit
on January 24, 2026 added a four-stage architecture: free-text formulation parsing, Gaussian-
process surrogate training, constrained candidate generation, and a validation/update loop.
Each stage was placed in a separate source directory with a companion README, and the
same commit added requirements, processed data, a trained baseline model, candidate tables,
and a wet-lab validation template.
The data layer converted unstructured formulation descriptions into a machine-learning
matrix by canonicalizing ingredient synonyms, excluding basal media and buffers, harmonizing
concentrations where possible, retaining DMSO as both a feature and a design constraint,
and averaging duplicate formulation entries with discordant viabilities. The modeling layer
then fit a standardized Gaussian-process regressor with a Mat´ ern kernel, which was selected
because the literature dataset was small and because predictive uncertainty was needed for
sequential experiment selection. The first baseline model tracked 21 ingredient features and
already produced cross-validation diagnostics, feature-importance output, and serialized model
artifacts.
The first optimization layer was already split into two candidate streams: a general low-
DMSO pool with an upper DMSO bound and a near-DMSO-free pool. The first generated
summaries ranked predicted formulations with uncertainty estimates and ingredient counts,
while the validation module created the file interface needed to add measured post-thaw viabil-
ity and retrain the model. The early commit history on GitHub showed the limitations of this
baseline as well as its usefulness; yet within the next three days, follow-up commits corrected
candidate formatting, added a dedicated differential-evolution Bayesian-optimization module,
introduced explainability plots, and implemented a prior-mean wet-lab correction model. There-
fore, the one-shot output did not produce the final scientific workflow, but it did generate the
working scaffold from which the later iteration-aware, calibrated, and explainable system was
built.
T able 1 —Top 15 ingredients sorted by appearance in unique formulations reported in the literature.
Ingredient Appearances Highest viability reported (%)
Dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) 89 100
Fetal bovine serum (FBS) 58 92
Sucrose 31 93.4
Trehalose 28 99
Ethylene glycol 20 96
Human serum albumin (HSA) 20 95.7
Glycerol 18 83
Hydroxyethyl starch (HES) 17 100
Human serum 13 95.7
Polyethylene glycol (PEG;∼3350 Da) 13 94
Polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP) 13 72.5
Methylcellulose 11 91
Propylene glycol 8 83.4
Ectoin 6 96
Betaine 5 84
8

3.2 Dataset cleanup and literature formulation landscape
Our dataset comprises 198 unique formulations from 42 independent studies retained after clean-
ing the original 393 formulations (Supplementary Data). The overall post-thaw viability across
all formulations demonstrated significant variance, averaging 63.88% (median: 70.00%, range:
0.00–100.00%). Analysis of the distribution of standard cryoprotective agents reveals DMSO as
the most prominent component, present in 89 formulations (44.9%). Other frequently utilized
additives included fetal bovine serum (FBS) (29.3%), sucrose (15.7%), trehalose (14.1%), ethy-
lene glycol (10.1%), and human serum albumin (HSA) (10.1%). The dataset contains a slight
majority of DMSO-free formulations (n = 109, 55.1%). While popular, there remains an effi-
cacy gap between the two categories: DMSO-containing formulations (n = 89) demonstrated
a higher average post-thaw viability of 71.90%, whereas DMSO-free formulations (n = 109)
yielded a notably lower average post-thaw viability of 57.33%. A summary of the literature
data is presented in Table 1.
A critical subset of 59 formulations (29.8%) achieved excellent post-thaw cell viabilities
of≥80%. Within this high-performing threshold, the reliance on DMSO was pronounced,
occurring in 42 (71.2%) of these top formulations. Other recurring components in this high-
efficacy tier included FBS, trehalose, hydroxyethyl starch (HES), and ethylene glycol. These
results established both the usefulness and the bias of the literature prior: the model could
learn meaningful formulation structure, but a direct literature-trained optimum would likely
over-favor DMSO-containing recipes.
3.3 Initial model and first wet-lab validation
To establish a pre-experimental baseline, we first trained a Gaussian process model using the
literature-curated formulation dataset. On five-fold cross-validation, this model achieved an
RMSE of 20.25±1.99 with a meanR 2 of 0.247±0.096, and when fit to the full literature set
it reached a training RMSE of 14.55 andR 2 = 0.618 (Fig. 2a). These results indicated that the
literature data contained recoverable predictive structure, but only with moderate fidelity. The
literature-only model’s SHAP importance showed that the initial model was strongly shaped
by ingredients that were common or historically successful in the literature record (Fig. 2c).
That performance did not translate prospectively. In the first wet-lab validation on the
literature-only model (iteration 0) using the iterative process described in Fig. 3, the model’s
error increased sharply on 18 candidate formulations, with RMSE rising to 41.21 whileR 2 fell
to -2.52, and rank-based agreement was poor (Fig. 2b, Fig. 4). We attribute this drop primarily
to the heterogeneity and reporting bias of literature-derived data. The aggregated studies span
different mesenchymal stem cell sources, cryopreservation workflows, assay endpoints, post-thaw
handling conditions, and reporting standards, meaning that nominally similar formulations may
reflect substantially different experimental contexts. The model update after this first batch
changed the attribution pattern, as shown by the post-update SHAP importance (Fig. 2d),
supporting the need for iterative wet-lab feedback rather than one-shot literature extrapolation.
9

a
 b
c
 d
Fig. 2 —Initial model and first wet-lab validation: a, literature-only predicted versus reported viability;
b, wet-lab predicted versus measured viability for the first validation batch; c, SHAP importance for the
literature-only model; d, SHAP importance after model update using the first wet-lab validation batch
results. In a and b, each dot represents a formulation’s viability.
Fig. 3 —Schematic of the iterative optimization process. An optimizer based on the trained model
generates candidate formulations for viability testing. The measured results are then used to update the
trained models.
10

3.4 Model after ten iterations of wet-lab validation
Across the closed-loop validation campaign, the model was updated after each wet-lab batch and
progressively shifted from a literature-only predictor toward a wet-lab-corrected surrogate. In
total, the validation table contains 106 wet-lab observations after the literature-derived training
set. The practical outcome improved relative to the literature-only batch: the best formula-
tion in the literature-only batch reached 72.93% viability, iteration 1 increased the best-so-far
value to 79.09%, and iteration 5 identified the highest observed formulation, EXP5110 with 21.0
mM DMSO, 291.1 mM ectoin, 1.79 M ethylene glycol, and 5.4% FBS, achieving 95.15% via-
bility (Supplementary Data). We would like to note that iteration 5’s elevated viability should
be interpreted cautiously because it may reflect a combination of model-guided enrichment and
batch-level experimental variation. The high-performing formulations clustered around a related
low-DMSO ectoin/ethylene glycol/FBS region, but they were tested within a narrow wet-lab
window in which subtle differences in cell condition, handling, and measurement could system-
atically shift viability. Thus, this result is useful evidence for a promising local formulation
region, but should not be taken as a standalone demonstration of global model improvement.
Over the course of the validation loop, model error also improved. Batch RMSE fell from 41.21
in the literature-only prospective test to 21.67 after iteration 1, 14.74 after iteration 2, 10.10 af-
ter iteration 8, and 6.86 after iteration 9, while later-stage rank agreement became consistently
positive (Fig. 4).
Fig. 4 —Batch-level model evaluation across validation stages. Frozen model checkpoints were evalu-
ated against the wet-lab batches generated at the corresponding stage. RMSE and MAE are reported in
viability percentage points; lower values indicate smaller prediction error. Spearman’sρand Kendall’s
τmeasure rank agreement within each batch; higher values indicate better preservation of formulation
ordering. Because individual wet-lab batches were small, these metrics should be interpreted as stage-
level diagnostics rather than progressive performance curves.
11

A comprehensive look across all batches showed the same overall trend while retaining
the expected noise of small experimental batches (Fig. 4). The earliest stages (iteration 0-4)
using random search were unstable: models had erratic ranking behavior (Spearman’sρand
Kendall’sτ); even at iteration 4, the model still had a negative rank correlation despite iteration
4’s low RMSE due to the narrow viability range of formulations in that batch. In contrast,
later Bayesian optimization stages (iteration 5-9) showed exploratory behavior that improved
ranking significantly: Spearman’sρreached 0.79, 0.66, 0.82, 0.86, and 0.81 across iterations
5-9. Although the exploration formulations drove up error in the early Bayesian optimization
stages, error eventually dropped with more iterations. These metrics show that the loop became
practically better at understanding the viability range and at nominating testable formulations
with good viability. In the end, iteration 9 had a batch RMSE of 6.86, and the cumulative wet-
lab predicted-versus-measured summary containing 106 wet-lab observations reached anR 2 of
0.942 (Fig. 5a). After iteration 9’s model was updated with wet-lab results, the iteration 10
SHAP feature importance was plotted to further demonstrate the shift from the initial literature
model, with ethylene glycol and ectoin emerging as major contributors alongside the original
DMSO-rich literature signal rather than remaining subordinate to it (Fig. 5b).
a
 b
Fig. 5 —Latest wet-lab-corrected model summary after iterative validation: a, cumulative predicted-
versus-measured wet-lab viability summary using the iteration-9 checkpoint across 106 wet-lab obser-
vations; b, iteration-10 SHAP importance after updating the iteration-9 model with wet-lab validation
results. DMSO remained an influential feature, while ethylene glycol and ectoin emerged as major wet-
lab-adapted contributors.
Apart from regular performance metrics, in each batch, we generated the acquisition land-
scape and interaction contours that are central to quickly understanding the potentially unex-
plored areas and ingredient interactions. These plots translate a high-dimensional Gaussian-
process model into decision maps that an experimentalist can act on. The acquisition landscape
shows where the model predicts high viability, where it is uncertain, and where the combina-
tion of the two gives high upper-confidence-bound utility. The script automatically displays
the acquisition landscape of the two most important cell-viability determinants. In the latest
model’s acquisition landscape (Fig. 6a), the highest utility region remains concentrated around
the ectoin/ethylene glycol neighborhood that had already produced strong wet-lab results, but
the uncertainty panel also identifies nearby areas where additional tests would be most infor-
mative. This makes the next experimental decision less arbitrary: one can choose candidates
trending toward the high-prediction region to confirm reproducibility, or choose candidates near
the high-uncertainty/high-UCB boundary to test whether the optimum can be extended.
12

The interaction contours provide a complementary view. The script automatically selects
the most important cell-viability determinant and compares its interactions with the next three
most important determinants. In the latest model’s interaction contour (Fig. 6b), the ethylene
glycol/ectoin panel is the most directly actionable because it maps the main chemistry repeat-
edly selected by the model and validated in the wet lab; the high-response region suggests that
future batches should refine this pair locally rather than scan the full formulation space again.
The ethylene glycol/DMSO contour is also important because it helps define whether DMSO
is acting as a necessary co-protectant or whether low-DMSO formulations can remain viable
when ethylene glycol and ectoin are tuned appropriately. Similarly, the ethylene glycol/FBS
contour highlights a potentially useful serum-dependent effect, suggesting that FBS may not
simply be a background supplement but may modify the concentration range in which ethylene
glycol performs well.
Together, these two types of figures support a practical next-step strategy. The acquisition
landscape identifies where to test next, while the interaction contours suggest why those tests
are biologically and formulation-wise interesting. The most compelling follow-up experiments
would therefore not be isolated single recipes, but small local grids around ectoin/ethylene
glycol/FBS with controlled low-DMSO levels, plus boundary probes in regions where the model
has high uncertainty but plausible acquisition value. Such experiments would directly test
whether the apparent optimum is robust, whether DMSO can be further reduced, and whether
the serum/ethylene glycol interaction represents a reproducible formulation effect rather than
a batch-specific artifact.
13

a
b
Fig. 6 —Acquisition and interaction landscapes after updating the iteration-9 model: a, predicted
mean viability, predictive uncertainty, and static Bayesian-optimization score across the ectoin/ethylene
glycol slice. The static Bayesian-optimization score combines UCB with implementation penalties and
is therefore not identical to pure UCB (Supplementary Methods); b, support-aware interaction contours
for selected ingredient pairs. Filled contour colors indicate model-predicted viability on the displayed
two-feature slice while other ingredients are held at the plotting baseline. Dashed boundaries indicate
the support-aware region used to distinguish interpolation from extrapolation. Circles denote literature
observations and triangles denote wet-lab observations.
14

4 Discussion
Owing to the rapid development of large language models (LLMs), this study demonstrates
that the lack of in-house computational specialization is no longer an absolute barrier to using
machine learning in experimental formulation research. With a single initial prompt, Claude
Opus 4.5 generated a runnable baseline repository that translated a scientific objective into
data parsing, Gaussian-process modeling, Bayesian optimization with constrained candidate
generation, validation templates, and written documentation. Subsequent work with GPT-
5.3-codex and human review then converted that first scaffold into a more rigorous closed-
loop workflow with iteration-aware model checkpoints, wet-lab-weighted residual correction,
explainability plots, and batch recommendation. The important point is that the first answer
was useful enough as an executable starting point for a real experimental campaign.[9, 10, 11]
This mode of AI assistance is particularly valuable in projects like cryomicroneedle formula-
tion discovery because the computational burden is broad rather than defined by one algorithm.
The workflow required many small but connected engineering tasks: synonym handling, unit
conversion, duplicate management, model serialization, candidate filtering, uncertainty report-
ing, wet-lab data ingestion, stage-level evaluation, and figure generation. These are tasks that
can consume substantial researcher time even when the underlying scientific question is clear.
In our case, the AI-generated infrastructure helped turn a manually curated literature table
into a sequential optimization system that ultimately identified simple two- to three-component
formulations with high post-thaw viability. These simple formulation results were not what
we initially expected given the 10-ingredient limit, but it was a natural optimization outcome;
in this small-data setting, high-order combinations are poorly supported and mostly extrap-
olative, so the model naturally favors sparse formulations where the viability signal is better
constrained. In the end, we are happy to see that the assistance provided by LLM agents was
not only faster coding, but also a faster conversion of biological intent into a functional and
reproducible computational workflow.
Still, the present work is not a demonstration of full scientific autonomy. Literature search
and extraction persisted as major human bottlenecks. Search application programming inter-
faces (APIs) such as Semantic Scholar and OpenAlex lower the cost of finding papers, but they
do not guarantee that the relevant corpus is complete, that full text is accessible, or that exper-
imental details are preserved in a machine-readable form.[12, 13] Many useful cryopreservation
papers reported formulations in tables, scanned PDFs, supplemental files, or inconsistent prose
that make rule-based automation error-prone. Literature search and extraction, even with LLM
agents, can confuse absolute viability with viability normalized to a control, miss units, merge
chemically distinct additives, or treat basal media as active formulation variables. These errors
change the training data and therefore change the experiments suggested by the model. For
this reason, manual curation and domain-aware checking remained necessary.
Apart from wet-lab validation, which remained fundamentally human and physical,
manuscript writing continued to be a human responsibility. LLM agents were helpful for
drafting, restructuring, checking code history, and linking computational outputs to figures,
but the authors still had to decide what the study could honestly claim. That included
distinguishing a proof-of-concept result from a clinic-ready formulation, arguing how useful
the results are and how they should be interpreted, as well as describing limitations without
15

overstating the autonomy of the system. In scientific writing, the hardest task may not be
producing sentences, but deciding which claims are justified and presentable.
On the experimental front, the most important limitation is that post-thaw viability did not
by itself predict cryomicroneedle usability, partly because the present optimization was single-
objective. In our validations, most of the formulations that exceeded 70% cell viability did not
form an intact cryomicroneedle patch. A plausible reason is that the formulation chemistry
that protects cells during freezing can conflict with the formulation chemistry needed to form
a mechanically stable frozen microneedle. High concentrations of permeating cryoprotectants,
serum, polymers, and osmolytes can depress the freezing point, increase the unfrozen liquid
fraction, alter ice-crystal structure, change viscosity, and/or weaken the frozen matrix. These
effects may preserve cells but prevent formation of a rigid, continuous needle array capable
of demolding, handling, and inserting into skin. As a result, the high viability we observed
should be interpreted as a biological success rather than a complete cryomicroneedle formulation
success. The model explicitly optimized post-thaw viability while using DMSO limits and
ingredient-count constraints as guardrails, but it did not optimize mechanical strength, patch
integrity, and insertion efficiency. This workflow was appropriate for a first proof-of-concept,
but it also means that the model could have favored formulations that are biologically protective
yet physically unsuitable for cryomicroneedle delivery.[4, 5, 1]
Future work should therefore move from a viability-only formulation search to a multi-
objective active-learning workflow. The next model should treat post-thaw viability, intact
patch formation, fracture force, and successful skin insertion as coupled outcomes.[6, 8] Some
endpoints could be modeled as continuous objectives, whereas others, such as intact patch
formation, may be very useful as a hard feasibility filter. Safety constraints should also be
added explicitly, including stricter bounds on ethylene glycol and DMSO, dose-normalized
exposure estimates, and searches for chemically safer substitutes that preserve the beneficial
ectoin/ethylene-glycol region without carrying the same translational burden.[5] We hypothesize
that a diversification of ingredients can have a cooperative effect in reducing the concentration
of each ingredient, and that a reduced concentration across the board will render forming intact
cryomicroneedles tenable.
16

References
[1] Hao Chang, Sharon W. T. Chew, Mengjia Zheng, Daniel Chin Shiuan Lio, Christian
Wiraja, Yu Mei, Xiaoyu Ning, Mingyue Cui, Aung Than, Peng Shi, Dongan Wang, Kanyi
Pu, Peng Chen, Haiyan Liu, and Chenjie Xu. Cryomicroneedles for transdermal cell deliv-
ery.Nature Biomedical Engineering, 5(9):1008–1018, May 2021. doi: 10.1038/s41551-021-
00720-1.
[2] Mengjia Zheng, Tianli Hu, Yating Yang, Xuan Qie, Huaxin Yang, Yuyue Zhang, Qizheng
Zhang, Ken-Tye Yong, Wei Liu, and Chenjie Xu. In situ-formed cryomicroneedles for
intradermal cell delivery.NPG Asia Materials, 16, February 2024. doi: 10.1038/s41427-
024-00531-1.
[3] Shubhmita Bhatnagar, Kaushalkumar Dave, and Venkata Vamsi Krishna Venuganti. Mi-
croneedles in the clinic.Journal of Controlled Release, 260:164–182, August 2017. doi:
10.1016/j.jconrel.2017.05.029.
[4] David Whaley, Kimia Damyar, Rafal P. Witek, Alan Mendoza, Michael Alexander, and
Jonathan R. T. Lakey. Cryopreservation: An overview of principles and cell-specific con-
siderations.Cell Transplantation, 30, 2021. doi: 10.1177/0963689721999617.
[5] Kathryn A. Murray and Matthew I. Gibson. Chemical approaches to cryopreservation.
Nature Reviews Chemistry, 6(8):579–593, August 2022. doi: 10.1038/s41570-022-00407-4.
[6] Bobak Shahriari, Kevin Swersky, Ziyu Wang, Ryan P. Adams, and Nando de Freitas.
Taking the human out of the loop: A review of bayesian optimization.Proceedings of the
IEEE, 104(1):148–175, January 2016. doi: 10.1109/JPROC.2015.2494218.
[7] Peter I. Frazier. A tutorial on bayesian optimization.CoRR, abs/1807.02811, 2018. doi:
10.48550/arXiv.1807.02811.
[8] Gary Tom, Stefan P. Schmid, Sterling G. Baird, Yang Cao, Kourosh Darvish, Han Hao,
Stanley Lo, Sergio Pablo-Garc´ ıa, Ella M. Rajaonson, Marta Skreta, Naruki Yoshikawa,
Samantha Corapi, Gun Deniz Akkoc, Felix Strieth-Kalthoff, Martin Seifrid, and Al´ an
Aspuru-Guzik. Self-driving laboratories for chemistry and materials science.Chemical
Reviews, 124(16):9633–9732, 2024. doi: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.4c00055.
[9] Xingyao Wang, Yangyi Chen, Lifan Yuan, Yizhe Zhang, Yunzhu Li, Hao Peng, and Heng
Ji. Executable code actions elicit better llm agents.CoRR, abs/2402.01030, 2024. doi:
10.48550/arXiv.2402.01030.
[10] John Yang, Carlos E. Jimenez, Alexander Wettig, Kilian Lieret, Shunyu Yao, Karthik
Narasimhan, and Ofir Press. SWE-agent: Agent-computer interfaces enable automated
software engineering.Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 37, 2024. doi:
10.48550/arXiv.2405.15793.
[11] Chris Lu, Cong Lu, Robert Tjarko Lange, Yutaro Yamada, Shengran Hu, Jakob Foer-
ster, David Ha, and Jeff Clune. Towards end-to-end automation of AI research.Nature,
651(8107):914–919, March 2026. doi: 10.1038/s41586-026-10265-5.
17

[12] Suzanne Fricke. Semantic scholar.Journal of the Medical Library Association, 106(1):145–
147, 2018. doi: 10.5195/jmla.2018.280.
[13] Jason Priem, Heather A. Piwowar, and Richard Orr. OpenAlex: A fully-open index of
scholarly works, authors, venues, institutions, and concepts.CoRR, abs/2205.01833, 2022.
doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2205.01833.
18

Supplementary Methods
AI-assisted workflow construction
The initial one-shot prompt and agent transcript were recorded inprompt.mdin the GitHub
repository. Project code is available athttps://github.com/baitmeister/ML-for-CryoMN.
A condensed transcript is provided below with local machine-specific absolute paths replaced
by relative project-root references. The transcript is included only to document the first com-
putational scaffold; final workflow components already described in the main manuscript are
not repeated here.
Condensed chat conversation
Note:Long scientific background already covered in the main manuscript and routine file-edit con-
firmations are omitted except where they document a change in workflow logic.
User InputThe scientific background, optimization targets and major constraints from the
initial prompt are summarized in the main manuscript rather than repeated here. Implementation-
specific prompt details retained for reproducibility were that the agent should parse formulation and
viability text into a structured matrix, merge supplied synonym groups, exclude culture media as
variables, harmonize concentration units where possible, handle duplicate formulations with discor-
dant viability values, and output scripts plus Markdown README files for each major step. The
complete original wording is preserved inprompt.md.
Listed directory [ML for CryoMN](project-root/)
Planner ResponseFound the CSV file. Let me examine its contents to understand the data
structure and then develop an appropriate ML approach.
Viewed [Cryopreservative Data 2026.csv](project-root/Cryopreservative%20Data%202026.csv)
Planner ResponseLet me see the rest of the file to understand the full dataset and then create
a comprehensive plan.
Viewed [Cryopreservative Data 2026.csv](project-root/Cryopreservative%20Data%202026.csv)
Planner ResponseNow I have a comprehensive understanding of the data. Let me create the
implementation plan detailing the ML approach and the first step (data parsing). The dataset has
˜900 rows which is relatively small, so I need to choose an appropriate ML approach.
Edited relevant file
Edited relevant file
Planner ResponseI’ve created the implementation plan. Now I need to notify the user for
their review and approval before proceeding to execution.
User InputThis is a system-generated message that is sent due to the user’s review policy.
Proceed with the decision that you think is the most optimal here.
User accepted the commandmkdir -p "ML for CryoMN/data/raw" "ML for CryoMN/data/processed"
"ML for CryoMN/data/validation" "ML for CryoMN/src/01 data parsing" "ML for CryoMN/src/02 model training"
"ML for CryoMN/src/03 optimization" "ML for CryoMN/src/04 validation loop" "ML for
CryoMN/docs"
1

User accepted the commandcp "ML for CryoMN/Cryopreservative Data 2026.csv" "ML for
CryoMN/data/raw/"
Planner ResponseNow let me create the main parsing script. This is a comprehensive script
that will parse the formulation data from the CSV file.
Edited relevant file
Planner ResponseNow let me create the README documentation for the parsing step and
also create a requirements.txt file:
Edited relevant file
Edited relevant file
Edited relevant file
Planner ResponseNow let me run the parsing script to test it and verify it works correctly:
User accepted the commandcd "ML for CryoMN" && python src/01 data parsing/parse formulations.py
2>&1 | head -100
Planner ResponseThe script found 169 duplicate pairs which is too many to resolve interac-
tively. I need to modify the script to handle this better - by automatically using the mean viability
for duplicates or keeping the first occurrence. Let me update the script:
Planner ResponseI need to update the parsing script to handle duplicates automatically
instead of requiring interactive input for 169 pairs. Let me fix this:
Viewed [parse formulations.py](project-root/src/01data parsing/parse formulations.py)
Planner ResponseNow I need to update the script to handle duplicates automatically. I’ll
modify the duplicate resolution function to automatically average viabilities for duplicate formula-
tions instead of requiring interactive input:
Edited relevant file
Planner ResponseI need to use the proper format for replace file content with the Target-
Content parameter:
Edited relevant file
Planner ResponseNow I need to update the main function to call the new [auto resolve duplicates](cci:1://project-
root/src/01 data parsing/parse formulations.py:489:0-552:13) function instead of the old interactive
one:
Edited relevant file
Planner ResponseNow let me run the parsing script again to verify it works correctly:
User accepted the commandcd "ML for CryoMN" && python src/01 data parsing/parse formulations.py
Planner ResponseThe script ran successfully! It parsed 374 formulations, found 169 duplicate
pairs, averaged them down to 200 unique formulations, and saved the output. However, I notice a
viability value of 341% which seems invalid (likely a relative viability compared to control). Let me
verify the output and check on this issue:
User accepted the commandcd "ML for CryoMN" && head -20 data/processed/parsed formulations.csv
2

User accepted the commandcd "ML for CryoMN" && python -c "import pandas as pd;
df = pd.read csv(’data/processed/parsed formulations.csv’); print(’Rows with
viability > 100%:’); print(df[df[’viability percent’] > 100][[’formulation id’,
’viability percent’, ’source doi’]].head(10))"
Planner ResponseI see there are some entries with viability ¿ 100% (like 341% which is
an average including values ”130% compared to standard DMSO”). These are relative viabilities
compared to a control, not absolute percentages. I need to handle this edge case. Let me also update
the task checklist and create a walkthrough document:
Edited relevant file
Edited relevant file
Planner ResponseI’ve completed Step 1: Data Parsing. Let me notify the user about the
completed work and share the results:
User InputProceed, do not ask me for permission in the future. Complete the entire workflow
Edited relevant file
Edited relevant file
Planner ResponseNow let me run the model training script:
User accepted the commandcd "ML for CryoMN" && python src/02 model training/train gp model.py
Planner ResponseModel training completed successfully! The GP model achieved:
•CV R 2: 0.239 (indicating the task is challenging with this limited data)
•Training R 2: 0.686
•DMSO is the most important feature
Now let me proceed with Step 3: Optimization:
Edited relevant file
Edited relevant file
Planner ResponseNow let me run the optimization script:
User accepted the commandcd "ML for CryoMN" && python src/03 optimization/optimize formulation.py
Planner ResponseThe optimization is running in background. Let me check its status:
Checked command status
Planner ResponseStill running. Let me wait a bit more:
Checked command status
Planner ResponseThere’s an error - the candidates DataFrame is empty because the opti-
mization isn’t finding valid candidates. Let me fix the optimize function:
Viewed [optimize formulation.py](project-root/src/03optimization/optimize formulation.py)
3

Planner ResponseI see the issue - thedifferential evolutionmight not be converging
properly. Let me fix the optimize function to handle empty candidates and simplify the optimization
approach:
Edited relevant file
Planner ResponseNow let me run the optimization again:
User accepted the commandcd "ML for CryoMN" && python src/03 optimization/optimize formulation.py
Planner ResponseExcellent! Optimization completed successfully! Now let me create Step 4:
Validation Loop and finish the workflow:
Edited relevant file
Edited relevant file
Planner ResponseNow let me run the validation loop script to create the template, then
update the task checklist and walkthrough:
User accepted the commandcd "ML for CryoMN" && python src/04 validation loop/update model.py
Planner ResponseNow let me update the task.md and walkthrough.md with the final results:
Edited relevant file
Edited relevant file
Planner ResponseNow let me update the main project README with complete documenta-
tion and verify everything is working correctly:
Edited relevant file
User accepted the commandcd "ML for CryoMN" && ls -la results/
User accepted the commandcd "ML for CryoMN" && cat results/candidates general summary.txt
Planner ResponseExcellent! The entire pipeline is complete and working. Let me view the
DMSO-free candidates and then notify the user with the final summary:
User accepted the commandcd "ML for CryoMN" && cat results/candidates dmso free summary.txt
User Inputhave you run the whole pipeline once? if not please run it to see if there’s any error
Planner ResponseYes, I ran each step individually during development! But let me run the
complete pipeline from scratch end-to-end to verify there are no errors:
User accepted the commandcd "ML for CryoMN" && echo "=== Step 1: Data Parsing ==="
&& python src/01 data parsing/parse formulations.py && echo "" && echo "=== Step 2:
Model Training ===" && python src/02 model training/train gp model.py && echo "" &&
echo "=== Step 3: Optimization ===" && python src/03 optimization/optimize formulation.py
&& echo "" && echo "=== Step 4: Validation Loop ===" && python src/04 validation loop/update model.py
&& echo "" && echo "=== PIPELINE COMPLETE ==="
Planner Response✓Complete pipeline ran successfully with no errors!
All 4 steps executed without any issues:
4

Step Status Key Output
1. Data Parsing✓200 unique formulations extracted
2. Model T raining✓GP model trained (CV R 2=0.24, Training R2=0.69)
3. Optimization✓20 general + 15 DMSO-free candidates generated
4. V alidation Loop✓Template created, awaiting wet lab results
Key Results:
•Best general candidate: 78.6%±21.1% viability at 0.5% DMSO
•Best DMSO-free candidate: 77.9%±23.5% viability at 0% DMSO
The pipeline is ready for use. Step 4 correctly indicates it’s waiting for wet lab validation results
before it can update the model.
Dataset parsing and feature encoding
The first step was to identify data points with ‘unique conditions’. These included: (i) exper-
iments conducted with the same formulations tested on different cell types, (ii) experiments
where pre-treatment was done, or specialised methods such as electroporation was used to in-
troduce the cryoprotectant into the cell, (iii) experiments conducted with the same polymer or
copolymer of different molecular weights/ratios, (iv) studies where viability or recovery metrics
was reported as a value relative to a standard experiment, and (v) experiments where commer-
cial cryoprotectants was used whose full formations is unknown or not reported. This manual
process reduced usable data points from 499 to 393 (Supplementary Data).
Free-text formulation records were parsed into canonical ingredient features. Synonyms
were merged for common cryoprotectants and additives, including DMSO/Me 2SO, ethy-
lene glycol/EG, propylene glycol/1,2-propanediol/PROH, ectoin/ectoine, FBS/FCS,
HES/hydroxyethyl starch, HSA/human serum albumin, methylcellulose/MC, hyaluronic
acid/HMW-HA and dextran/dextran-40. Basal media and buffers, including DMEM,α-MEM,
PBS, HBSS, saline and related media terms, were excluded as formulation variables.
Molar-convertible ingredients were represented in molar units ( M). Percentage-only ingredients,
including sera, proteins, PEG species, polymers and other complex mixtures, were represented
as percentage features ( pct). PEG was split by molecular weight class rather than treated as
one generic feature. Concentration parsing supported percentage, M, mM and mg/ml inputs
where molecular weights and densities permitted conversion.
Rows without extractable formulation text or extractable viability were excluded from model
training. When identical canonical formulation signatures were associated with different ex-
tracted viabilities, the duplicate signatures were collapsed by averaging the viability values and
retaining one representative formulation row. The final parsed literature dataset contained 198
unique formulations and 34 canonical formulation features. For active model training, features
were retained only if present in at least three literature formulations, yielding 21 active input
variables.
Gaussian-process model configuration
The literature-only surrogate used Gaussian-process regression with a Mat´ ern kernel with
smoothness parameterν= 2.5, whereνcontrols the smoothness of the fitted response func-
tion. The kernel also included a constant-amplitude term and a white-noise term. Input fea-
5

tures were standardized usingStandardScaler, the target was normalized internally by the
Gaussian-process regressor and hyperparameter optimization used 10 optimizer restarts. The
initial model used five-fold cross-validation withshuffle=Trueandrandom state=42.
Prior-mean correction update
After wet-lab data became available, the production update strategy used a composite model.
A literature Gaussian process first predicted a baseline viability for each formulation. A second
Gaussian process was then fitted to wet-lab residuals, where residual means measured viability
minus literature-model prediction. The composite prediction was:
ˆy(x) = ˆyliterature(x) + ˆrwetlab(x),(1)
wherexis the formulation vector, ˆy(x) is final predicted viability, ˆyliterature(x) is the literature-
model prediction and ˆrwetlab(x) is the wet-lab residual correction. The combined uncertainty
was computed by summing the literature and correction variances and taking the square root.
Source-specific noise assumptions were fixed atα literature = 1.0 andα wetlab = 0.02, whereαis
the Gaussian-process observation-noise regularization parameter. This corresponds to a 50-fold
relative weighting in favour of wet-lab observations. Wet-lab generalization was estimated by
cross-validating the wet-lab rows only, withK= min(5, n wetlab), whereKis the number of
folds andn wetlab is the number of available wet-lab rows. All literature rows were retained
in the training set for every fold. Cross-validated residuals were used to estimate an additive
prediction-bias correction (bias shift percent) and a multiplicative uncertainty correction
(uncertainty scale), which were applied consistently during optimization, evaluation and
next-batch recommendation.
Random-sampling candidate generation
In the first five stages, a large random pool of formulations was sampled from the feasible
formulation space. Candidates were normalized, trace concentrations were removed and hard
constraints were applied before prediction. Candidates were then ranked by Gaussian-process
predicted mean viability. We used two predefined DMSO-capped candidate pools: a general
pool allowing up to 5% v/v DMSO, and a project-defined “DMSO-free” pool allowing up to
0.5% v/v DMSO. In this manuscript, “DMSO-free pool” refers to this operational low-DMSO
optimization stratum rather than strict chemical absence. Candidate identity used a practi-
cal concentration floor: percentage features below 0.1% and molar features below 0.001 M,
equivalent to 1 mM, were treated as absent.
Acquisition-score scale and prediction calibration
For Bayesian optimization, the acquisition score was computed on the original post-thaw via-
bility scale, not on a standardized target scale. Feature standardization was applied internally
before Gaussian-process prediction, but both the predictive mean and uncertainty used for
acquisition remained in viability percentage-point units.
For literature-only checkpoints, the uncalibrated prediction was the mean and standard devia-
tion returned by the literature-trained Gaussian process. For wet-lab-updated checkpoints, the
6

prior-mean correction model described above supplied the uncalibrated composite meanµ 0(x)
and standard deviationσ 0(x). After each wet-lab update, cross-validated wet-lab residuals were
used to estimate an additive bias correctionband a multiplicative uncertainty scales, withs
selected to improve empirical one- and two-standard-deviation coverage.
The calibrated prediction used for acquisition scoring was therefore
µ(x) =µ 0(x) +b,(2)
σ(x) =s σ 0(x).(3)
If a checkpoint did not contain calibration metadata, the defaults were
b= 0, s= 1.(4)
For the iteration-10 checkpoint, for example, the stored calibration parameters were
b=−6.83 percentage points, s= 0.78.(5)
The upper-confidence-bound (UCB) acquisition score was then computed as
aUCB(x) =µ(x) +κσ(x),(6)
withκ= 0.5. Predictions were not clipped to the interval 0–100% before acquisition scoring.
Exported candidate tables reported the calibrated predicted viability, calibrated uncertainty,
and acquisition value for each candidate.
Bayesian optimization candidate generation
Bayesian optimization used the same Gaussian-process or composite surrogate model but
replaced random candidate search with Differential-Evolution optimization of the cali-
brated upper-confidence-bound score defined above. Each run generated 20 candidates with
maxiter=100,popsize=15andrandom seed=42.
The objective also included implementation penalties to keep candidates chemically plausible
and experimentally useful: a sparsity penalty of 0.35 for formulations with more active ingre-
dients than the observed reference count, a support penalty of 4.0 for candidates outside the
observed formulation manifold, and a local batch-diversity penalty of 5.0 with radius 0.05 to dis-
courage near-duplicate candidates within the same slate. The support radius was the weighted
90th percentile of observed nearest-neighbour distances multiplied by 1.25. Search bounds were
ingredient-specific: DMSO was bounded by the selected cap, ethylene glycol/glycerol/propylene
glycol by 2.5 M, trehalose/sucrose/raffinose by 1.0 M, proline/betaine/ectoin-class osmolytes
by 0.5 M, serum features by 90%, and hyaluronic acid/methylcellulose by 2%.
Reasoning for optimization method
We used a staged active-learning strategy that transitioned from broad constrained random
candidate generation toward Bayesian-optimization-guided candidate generation as wet-lab ev-
idence accumulated. The initial phase used random sampling to explore the experimentally
feasible formulation space under practical constraints. Bayesian-optimization candidate files
were generated during the transition period and were audited against wet-lab testing outcomes,
but the early prospective batches were not treated as purely acquisition-driven optimization
campaigns.
7

This design was recommended by Claude and chosen because the initial model was trained
largely from literature-derived formulations, which provided useful prior structure but was not
yet sufficiently calibrated to the specific wet-lab assay, formulation constraints, and experimental
handling conditions used in this study. In this setting, applying Bayesian optimization too
aggressively at the outset would risk over-exploiting artefacts of the literature prior, inaccurate
uncertainty estimates, or sparsely supported regions of the high-dimensional formulation space.
The random-search phase therefore served as a burn-in period. Candidate formulations were
sampled broadly under practical constraints and then evaluated prospectively, producing wet-
lab observations that were not concentrated around a single predicted optimum. This broad
sampling improved coverage of the experimentally accessible formulation space, exposed sys-
tematic model residuals, and provided the wet-lab anchors needed to recalibrate prediction
bias and uncertainty. It also reduced the risk that the optimization trajectory would collapse
prematurely onto a narrow region supported only by the literature model.
After this initial wet-lab grounding phase, the accumulated experimental data provided a
more reliable basis for model-guided optimization. Later stages increasingly used Differential-
Evolution-based Bayesian optimization together with the dedicated next-batch generator.
The Bayesian-optimization module searched for high-acquisition candidate pools, while the
next-batch generator converted those pools into wet-lab slates with an adaptive exploita-
tion/exploration split, residual-based blind-spot probes, local-rank probes and coverage
probes.
This two-phase strategy separates model grounding from model exploitation. Broad ran-
dom sampling was used while uncertainty estimates and rankings were still being established;
acquisition-guided search was introduced once the model had sufficient prospective wet-lab
evidence to make model-guided selection scientifically meaningful. The approach therefore pri-
oritizes robustness in the early phase and sample efficiency in the later phase.
Cryomicroneedle mold specification
The PDMS mold was made using a 1:9 ratio of curing agent and base supplied in the SYLGARD
184 Silicone Elastomer kit. Following vacuuming to remove air bubbles, the PDMS with the
positive mold was cured in an oven at 60 ◦C for 60 minutes. The positive mold was 3-D printed
with the following specification: a 10×10 pyramidal microneedle array patch; patch dimensions
of 1.63 cm×1.63 cm with 0.25 cm margins on each side; pitch = 1200µm; needle base = 500µm;
needle height = 1600µm; volume per needle = (1/3)×500×500×1600µm 3 ≈0.133µL; and
volume per patch = 100×0.133≈13.3µL.
Experimental batch design
The next-batch generator treated Bayesian optimization as a candidate-pool source rather than
as the complete experimental policy. It always wrote a 20-formulation slate. The default split
was 8 exploitation rows and 12 exploration rows, with exploitation count adaptively bounded
between 4 and 12 according to the previous completed stage’s RMSE, mean signed resid-
ual and empirical 1σcoverage. Exploitation candidates were selected from the active-stage
Bayesian-optimization candidate files after removing already tested formulations and applying
a chemistry-family diversity cap.
Exploration candidates came from local-rank probes, blind-spot probes and coverage probes.
Local-rank probes perturbed dominant ingredients around high-value anchors. Blind-spot
8

probes targeted historically underpredicted regions using positive residual thresholds evalu-
ated in descending order: 10, 8, 5, 2 and 0 percentage points. Exactly two coverage probes were
reserved by default and selected by greedyk-center distance from the observed context. The
generator also wrote recommended subsets for wet-lab capacities from 6 to 12 formulations.
Stage-based evaluation
Stage evaluation used frozen model checkpoints. Each stage was evaluated against the wet-
lab batch selected by that stage’s own candidate outputs. For example, the literature-only
model was evaluated against the first wet-lab batch selected from literature-only candidate
files, while iteration 3 was evaluated against the formulations selected from iteration 3 outputs.
The evaluation did not use later models to rescore earlier decisions as if those later models had
been available at the time.
For each stage batch, the evaluation script reported root mean squared error (RMSE), mean
absolute error (MAE), Spearman’s rank correlation coefficientρ, Kendall’s rank correlation
coefficientτ, mean predictive standard deviation, empirical coverage within±1σand±2σ, and
threshold-decision hit rates at 50% and 70% viability. Note that only the first four were reported
in the main text.
Specifically, model predictions were evaluated on the wet-lab-tested formulations, whereyi is the
measured post-thaw viability, and viability and uncertainty were expressed in percentage-point
units:
Ds ={(x i, yi)}ns
i=1 (7)
Then prediction error was quantified using root mean squared error (RMSE) and mean absolute
error (MAE), whereµ i is the model-predicted mean viability:
RMSEs =
vuut 1
ns
nsX
i=1
(yi −µ i)2 (8)
MAEs = 1
ns
nsX
i=1
|yi −µ i|(9)
Lower RMSE and MAE indicate more accurate viability prediction. RMSE penalizes large
errors more strongly because residuals are squared, whereas MAE reports the average absolute
prediction error in the original viability scale.
Ranking performance was assessed using Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient and Kendall’s
rank correlation coefficient. Spearman’sρwas computed as the Pearson correlation between
the ranks of measured and predicted viability:
ρs =
Pns
i=1

R(yi)− R(y)

R(µi)− R(µ)

rPns
i=1

R(yi)− R(y)
2
rPns
i=1

R(µi)− R(µ)
2
(10)
Higherρ s indicates better preservation of the ordering of formulations by viability;ρ s = 1
indicates perfect monotonic agreement,ρ s = 0 indicates no monotonic association, and negative
values indicate inverse ranking.
Kendall’sτwas computed from pairwise ordering agreement:
τs = Cs −D sp
(Cs +D s +T y)(Cs +D s +T µ)
(11)
9

whereC s andD s are the numbers of concordant and discordant formulation pairs, respectively,
andT y andT µ denote ties only in measured and predicted viability. Higherτ s indicates better
pairwise ranking consistency.
Predictive uncertainty was summarized by the mean predicted standard deviation:
σs = 1
ns
nsX
i=1
σi (12)
This metric reports the average model uncertainty for the evaluated formulations. It is diag-
nostic rather than directly optimized: lower values indicate narrower predictive distributions,
but uncertainty should be interpreted jointly with empirical coverage and error.
Calibration was assessed by empirical one-standard-deviation coverage:
Coverage@1σs = 1
ns
nsX
i=1
1(|y i −µ i| ≤σ i) (13)
For well-calibrated Gaussian predictive intervals, this value is expected to be approximately
0.68. Values below 0.68 indicate overconfident uncertainty estimates or systematic prediction
bias, whereas values above 0.68 indicate conservative uncertainty estimates.
Threshold decision performance was evaluated at viability thresholds of 50% and 70%. For a
thresholdθ, the hit rate was defined as:
HitRates(θ) = 1
ns
nsX
i=1
1[1(µ i ≥θ) =1(y i ≥θ)], θ∈ {50,70}(14)
Candidate files and next-formulation slates were cross-referenced against wet-lab rows by canon-
ical formulation signatures after applying the same trace-concentration floor used during can-
didate generation.
Prospective-cumulativeR 2
For predicted-versus-actual model-performance reporting,R 2, the coefficient of determination,
was computed using a prospective-cumulative protocol. At stagek, wherekis the current
model stage, predictions from the frozen stage model were evaluated against the cumulative
wet-lab rows available through stages 0. . . k. This preserves temporal ordering while increasing
sample size and outcome-range coverage. Batch-specificR 2 was not used as a primary endpoint
because individual wet-lab batches were small and often had restricted response ranges, making
R2 sensitive to outliers and sign changes that did not necessarily reflect practical predictive
utility. The stage-indexed predicted-versus-actual plots used measured viability on the x-axis,
predicted mean viability on the y-axis and predictive standard deviation as point colour.
Explainability analysis
Explainability analyses were generated from the active iteration-specific observed context, com-
bining literature and wet-lab rows with source weights. Feature importance was computed
by weighted permutation importance using degradation in weightedR 2. SHAP analysis used
KernelExplainerwhen the SHAP package was available, with up to 100 background sam-
ples and up to 100 explained samples. The feature-importance overview and SHAP plots were
10

limited to the top 12 features, empirical marginal plots to the top 6 features and interaction
contours to the top 3 feature pairs.
Support-aware plots (on Github) used weighted observed quantile ranges from the 1st to 95th
percentile rather than raw extrema. In one-dimensional empirical marginal plots, stronger local
support was indicated by solid line segments and weaker support by dashed segments. In two-
dimensional interaction and acquisition plots, dashed boundaries indicated stronger pairwise
empirical support. The static acquisition landscape reused the Bayesian-optimization scoring
convention, including UCB withκ= 0.5, support penalty 4.0, support-radius scale 1.25 and
sparsity penalty 0.35, but excluded sequential batch-diversity penalties because those depend
on already selected candidates. The uncertainty dashboard summarized predicted-versus-actual
agreement, empirical-versus-nominal coverage over uncertainty multipliers from 0.5 to 2.5, ab-
solute error versus predictive standard deviation and mean uncertainty across viability bands.
Figure and artifact traceability
The computational figures referenced in this supplementary analysis were generated di-
rectly from GitHub repository artifacts. Stage-level evaluation outputs were written under
results/evaluation/, includingstage performance.png,next formulations performance.png,
single objective progress.pnganditeration prospective metrics.csv. Stage-indexed
predicted-versus-actualR 2 plots were written underresults/explainability/stage r2/.
Iteration-specific explainability outputs were written underexplainability/<iteration tag>/,
includingfeature importance.png,shap summary.png,shap importance.png,
partial dependence plots.png,interaction contours.png,acquisition landscape.png,
uncertainty analysis.pngandsupport diagnostics.png.
11
